









































PAS 2008 Part 3.book(15.Block.fm)


Papers from the 2008 Joint Session

Phenomenal and Access Consciousness
Ned Block and Cynthia MacDonald
CONSCIOUSNESS AND COGNITIVE ACCESS

NED BLOCK

This article concerns the interplay between two issues that involve both
philosophy and neuroscience: whether the content of phenomenal con-
sciousness is ‘rich’ or ‘sparse’, whether phenomenal consciousness goes be-
yond cognitive access, and how it would be possible for there to be
evidence one way or the other.

I

Introduction. I will begin with an illustration that raises the issue of
whether phenomenal consciousness could be so divorced from cog-
nitive access that a subject can have an experience that he does not
and cannot think about. Then I will mention a puzzle about whether
there could be evidence one way or the other on that issue, and suggest
a solution to the puzzle. The issue of sparse versus rich experiences
will be introduced and connected to the puzzle, then some empirical
evidence will be described that casts some light on the issue.1

II

An Illustration. Nancy Kanwisher (2001) and her colleagues (Tong,
Nakayama, Vaughan and Kanwisher 1998) have found impressively
robust correlations between the experience of faces and activation
at the bottom of the temporal lobe, usually in the subject’s right
hemisphere in what they call the ‘fusiform face area’. One method
that has been used to investigate the neural basis of face perception
exploits a phenomenon known as ‘binocular rivalry’ (see Koch
2004, ch. 16). If a face-stimulus is presented to one eye and a house
stimulus to the other, the subject experiences a face for a few sec-

1 Most of the material presented here derives from Block (2007a, 2007b, forthcoming).
©2008 The Aristotelian Society
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, Vol. cviii, Part 3

doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9264.2008.00247.x



NED BLOCK290
onds, then a house, then a face, etc. If the visual processing areas of
the brain are examined while the face/house perceptual alternation
is ongoing, much stronger alternations in sync with the percept are
found in the fusiform face area than in other areas. The fusiform
face area lights up when subjects are experiencing seeing a face and
not when subjects are experiencing seeing a house, despite the fact
that the stimuli are unchanging. The fusiform face area also lights
up when subjects imagine faces (O’Craven and Kanwisher 2000).

No one would suppose that activation of the fusiform face area
all by itself is sufficient for face-experience. I have never heard any-
one advocate the view that if a fusiform face area were kept alive in
a bottle, that activation of it would determine face-experience, or
any experience at all (Kanwisher 2001). The total neural basis of a
state with phenomenal character C is—all by itself—sufficient for
the instantiation of C. The core neural basis of a state with phenom-
enal character C is the part of the total neural basis that distinguish-
es states with C from states with other phenomenal characters, for
example, the experience as of a face from the experience as of a
house. (The core neural basis is similar to what Semir Zeki (Zeki
2001; Zeki and Bartels 1999) has called an essential node.) So acti-
vation of the fusiform face area is a candidate for the core neural
basis—not the total neural basis—for experience as of a face (see
Block 2005; Chalmers 2000; Shoemaker 1981).

There is some evidence that a total neural basis of a kind of expe-
rience is the core neural basis of that kind of experience plus active
reverberations involving that core neural basis and the upper brain
stem including the thalamus. (The most convincing evidence is that
disabling the thalamus seems the common core of what different
general anesthetics do (Alkire and Miller 2005). But for some
doubts, see Alkire 2008; Tononi and Koch 2008.)

Here is the illustration I have been leading up to. There is a type
of brain injury which causes a syndrome known as ‘visuo-spatial ex-
tinction’. If the patient sees a single object on either side, the patient
can identify it, but if there are objects on both sides, the patient can
identify only the one on the right and claims not to see the one on
the left (Aimola Davies 2004). (With competition from the right, the
subject cannot attend to the left.) However as Geraint Rees has
shown in two fMRI studies of one patient (known as ‘GK’), when
GK claims not to see a face on the left, his fusiform face area (on the
right—which is fed by the left side of space) lights up almost as
©2008 The Aristotelian Society
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, Vol. cviii, Part 3

doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9264.2008.00247.x



PHENOMENAL AND ACCESS CONSCIOUSNESS 291
much as—and in overlapping areas involving the fusiform face
area—when he reports seeing the face (Driver and Vuilleumier
2001; Rees et al. 2000, 2002).

III

The Self. Should we conclude that the fusiform face area is not the
whole of the core neural basis for the experience as of a face? Or
that activation of the fusiform face area is the core neural basis for
the experience as of a face but that some other aspect of the total
neural basis is missing in GK? However, another possibility is that
GK genuinely has face experience that he doesn’t know about and
cannot know about. Wait—is that really a possibility? Does it even
make sense to suppose that a subject could have an experience that
he doesn’t and can’t know about? What would make it his experi-
ence?

The last question about GK can be answered by thinking about
his visual field. What is the visual field? If you look straight ahead
and hold a rod out to the side and slowly move it forward, you will
be able to see it at roughly 100° from straight ahead. If you do the
same coming down from the top, you will see it at roughly 60°, and
if you do it from the bottom, you will see it at roughly 75°. This is a
rough way of measuring the visual field. For more precision, the vis-
ual field is measured with gratings. Subjects are asked whether at a
given eccentricity the grating looks like a grating or like a uniform
grey field. The shape of the visual field in normal people is oval,
elongated to the right and left, and slightly larger on the bottom.
The Humphrey Field Analyser HFA-II-I can measure your visual
field in as little as two minutes. The United Kingdom has a mini-
mum visual field requirement for driving (60° to the side, 20° above
and below); US states vary widely in their requirements (Peli and
Peli 2002). Of course one can measure something without knowing
what it is. But it will be too much of a digression to go further into
that issue now. The point I wish to make is that it is known that
visuo-spatial extinction arises from a difficulty attending to one side
of space when there is a competing target of attention on the other
side of space. Some may say that GK’s lack of attention to the left
prevents him from having any experience of a face stimulus on the
left, but another possibility is that GK’s lack of attention to the left
©2008 The Aristotelian Society
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, Vol. cviii, Part 3

doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9264.2008.00247.x



NED BLOCK292
prevents his genuine experience of a face on the left from reaching
the machinery of cognitive access. On that hypothesis, we can un-
derstand the face experience as his experience by noting that it is in
his visual field. One could meaningfully ask, for example, whether it
is the same half of his visual field in the vertical dimension as his ex-
perience on the right, or which is closer to the periphery, the one on
the left or the one on the right.

In what follows, I will assume it is meaningful to suppose that GK
has an experience that he does not and cannot know about, turning
to the question of whether it would be possible to empirically inves-
tigate that meaningful possibility.

IV

The Methodological Puzzle. How could the issue be investigated? A
natural methodology is to find the neural basis of face experience in
clear cases and apply it to problem cases where for some reason
there is no cognitive accessibility of the experience. However, in or-
der to apply this methodology to the case of GK, one would first
have to ask the question as to whether the activation of the fusiform
face area (the core neural basis) plus its connections to the upper
brain stem is sufficient for consciousness (i.e. is a total neural basis),
or whether the total neural basis of face experience includes the
frontal activation that underlies the cognitive access that itself un-
derlies our ability to report our experience. But that question raises
the issue of whether there can be face experience without cognitive
accessibility, the very issue that we started with. So it looks as if the
obvious methodology eats its own tail.

Another variant of the problem: how can we find out whether
there can be conscious experience without the cognitive accessibility
required for reporting conscious experience, since any evidence
would have to derive from reports that themselves derive from that
cognitive access?

Note that the problem cannot be solved by stipulating a defini-
tion of ‘conscious’. Whatever definition one offered of this and oth-
er terms, the puzzle could be put in still other terms: for example,
there would still be the question of whether what it is like to have
that experience includes whatever cognitive processes underlie our
ability to report the experience.
©2008 The Aristotelian Society
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, Vol. cviii, Part 3

doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9264.2008.00247.x



PHENOMENAL AND ACCESS CONSCIOUSNESS 293
The problem does not arise in the study of, for example, water.
On the basis of the study of the nature of accessible water, we can
know the properties of inaccessible water, for example, in environ-
ments outside our light cone—that is, environments that are too far
away in space and time for signals travelling at the speed of light to
reach us. We have no problem in extrapolating from the observed to
the unobserved and even unobservable in the case of water because
we are antecedently certain that our cognitive access to water mole-
cules is not part of the constitutive scientific nature of water itself.
In homing in on a core neural basis of phenomenal consciousness,
we have a choice about whether or not to include within the core
neural basis the aspects of those neurological states that underlie re-
portability. If we do, then unreportable phenomenally conscious
states are ruled out; if we do not, unreportable phenomenally con-
scious states are allowed. Few scientifically minded people in the
twenty-first century would suppose that water molecules are partly
constituted by our cognitive access to them (Boghossian 2006), but
few would be sure whether phenomenal consciousness is or is not
partly constituted by cognitive access to it. It is this asymmetry that
is at the root of the Methodological Puzzle of phenomenal con-
sciousness.

V

The Solution. The solution to the Methodological Puzzle is the
method of inference to the best explanation, that is, the approach of
looking for the framework that makes the most sense of all the data,
not just reports (Harman 1965; Peirce 1903, vol. v, p. 171).

The reader may feel that I have already canvassed inference to the
best explanation and that it did not help. Recall that I mentioned
that the best explanation of all the data about observed water can
give us knowledge of unobserved—even unobservable—water. I
said that this approach does not apply straightforwardly to con-
sciousness. We are antecedently certain that our access to informa-
tion about water molecules is not part of the natural kind that
underlies water molecules themselves. But we are not certain (ante-
cedently or otherwise) about whether our cognitive access to our
own consciousness is partly constitutive of the consciousness. With-
out antecedent knowledge of this—according to the reasoning that
©2008 The Aristotelian Society
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, Vol. cviii, Part 3

doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9264.2008.00247.x



NED BLOCK294
leads to the Methodological Puzzle—we cannot know whether
whatever makes a phenomenal state cognitively inaccessible also
renders it non-phenomenal.

Here is the fallacy in that argument: the best theory of all the data
may be one that lumps consciousness together with water molecules
as something whose constitutive nature does not include cognitive
access to it. To hold otherwise is to suppose—mistakenly—that
there are antecedent views—or uncertainties, in this case—that are
not up for grabs.

Perhaps an analogy will help. It might seem, offhand, that it is im-
possible to know the extent of errors of measurement, for any meas-
urement of errors of measurement would have to be derived from
measurement itself. But we can build models of the sources of meas-
urement error and test them, and if necessary we can build models
of the error in the first-level models, and so on, stopping when we
get a good predictive fit. For example, the diameter of the moon can
be measured repeatedly by a number of different techniques, the re-
sults of which will inevitably vary about a mean. But perhaps the di-
ameter of the moon is itself varying? That can be investigated by
simultaneously building models of sources of variation in the diame-
ter itself (for example, the temperature of the moon) and models of
error in the various methods of measurement. Those models contain
assumptions which can themselves be further tested.

The puzzle of how it is possible to use measurement itself to un-
derstand errors of measurement is not a deep puzzle. As soon as one
sees the answer, the problem of principle falls away. I do not believe
that the same is true for the Methodological Puzzle. One reason is
the famous ‘explanatory gap’ (Levine 1983; Nagel 1974). There
may be reasonable doubt whether the method of inference to the
best explanation can apply in the face of the explanatory gap. A sec-
ond point is that with the demise of verificationism (Uebel 2006),
few would think that the nature of a physical magnitude such as
length or mass is constitutively tied to our measurement procedures.
The mass of the moon is what it is independently of our methods of
ascertaining what it is. But verificationism in the case of conscious-
ness is much more tempting—see Dan Dennett’s ‘first person opera-
tionism’ (Dennett 1991) for a case in point.
©2008 The Aristotelian Society
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, Vol. cviii, Part 3

doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9264.2008.00247.x



PHENOMENAL AND ACCESS CONSCIOUSNESS 295
VI

Rich versus Sparse Experience. As I explained at the outset, this pa-
per concerns the interplay between two issues, the Methodological
Puzzle just canvassed and the issue of ‘rich’ versus ‘sparse’ conscious
contents, the source of which, in current controversies, is a phenom-
en-on called ‘change blindness’. As illustrated in figure 1, a drawing
or photograph is presented briefly to subjects, followed by a blank,
followed sometimes by an identical photograph but other times by a
similar but not identical photograph, followed by another blank.
Then the cycle starts over.

Figure 1. The ‘change blindness’ paradigm. A picture is presented briefly, then a blank
screen, then another picture which may or may not differ in some respect from
the first one, then another blank, then the cycle starts over. The result is that sub-
jects are surprisingly unable to tell what changes between the two pictures, even
after watching the cycle many times. I am grateful to Ron Rensink for redrawing
this figure and for permission to use it.

You can experience something of the phenomenon if you look at fig-
ures 2 and 3 without looking at them side by side. When the two
photographs differ, they usually differ in one object that changes
colour, shape or position or appears or disappears. The surprising
result is that subjects are often unaware of the difference between
the two pictures, even when the changed region takes up a good
deal of the photographic real estate. Even with fifty repetitions of
©2008 The Aristotelian Society
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, Vol. cviii, Part 3

doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9264.2008.00247.x



NED BLOCK296
the same change over and over again, people are often unaware of
the change. It is widely agreed that the phenomenon is an attention-
al one. The items that change without detection have been shown to
be items that the subjects do not attend to. But the controversial
question is whether the explanation of the surprising inability of
subjects to notice the change is due to inattentional blindness or in-
attentional inaccessibility.

Figure 2. Compare this with figure 3 without looking at the two figures side by side.
There is a difference between the two pictures that can be hard to be aware of, a
fact that motivates the appellation (a misnomer in my view) ‘change blindness’.
I am grateful to Ron Rensink for supplying this figure.

The idea of the inattentional blindness view of the phenomenon is
that subjects do not actually see the features that change (Noë 2004,
O’Regan and Noë 2001). By contrast, the inattentional inaccessibil-
ity view (Block 2001) says that subjects may see the features that
change, but fail to notice the difference, because although much of
the detail in each picture is phenomenally registered, it is not con-
ceptualized at a level that allows cognitive access to the difference.
As Fred Dretske (2004) has noted, the difference between the two
stimuli in a change blindness experiment can be one object that ap-
pears or disappears, and one can be aware of that object that consti-
©2008 The Aristotelian Society
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, Vol. cviii, Part 3

doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9264.2008.00247.x



PHENOMENAL AND ACCESS CONSCIOUSNESS 297
tutes the difference without noticing that there is a difference. As
will be explained below, there appears to be a limit in ‘working
memory’ of about four items. (The existence of such a limit is not
part of the dispute between the proponents of inattentional blind-
ness and inattentional inaccessibility.) Proponents of inattentional
blindness typically take this limit to show that despite the appear-
ance of a rich visual world, one only sees about four items at a time,
and thus that conscious experience is surprisingly ‘sparse’. The im-
pression that one takes in many more things is supposed to derive
from a ‘refrigerator light illusion’ in which subjects mistake the easy
accessibility of all sorts of detail for actually seeing that detail
(O’Regan and Noë 2001). (The analogy invokes a fool who thinks
that the refrigerator light is always on because it is on when he
looks.) Dehaene and his colleagues put the point as follows:

The change blindness paradigm demonstrates this ‘discrepancy be-
tween what we see and what we think we see’ (Simons and Ambinder
2005). In this paradigm, viewers who claim to perceive an entire visu-
al scene fail to notice when an important element of the scene changes.
This suggests that, at any given time, very little of the scene is actually
consciously processed. Interestingly, changes that attract attention or
occur at an attended location are immediately detected. Thus, the illu-
sion of seeing may arise because viewers know that they can, at will,
orient attention to any location and obtain conscious information
from it. (Dehaene et al. 2006, p. 210)

The upshot is a disagreement about whether perceptual conscious-
ness is ‘rich’ or ‘sparse’. The advocates of ‘sparse’ visual experience
argue that the limits of working memory are the limits of experi-
ence, whereas the advocates of rich experience can allow that expe-
rience ‘overflows’ cognitive accessibility.

Now we can get a glimpse of the relevance of the sparse/rich issue
to the Methodological Puzzle. The argument of this paper is that we
already have some evidence for the ‘rich’ view, and the upshot is that
the capacity of the perceptual consciousness system is much larger
than the capacity of the ‘working memory’ system that underlies the
cognitive access that itself underlies reportability. And this difference
in capacity shows that consciousness and cognitive access are to
some extent based in different systems with different properties.

I have mentioned the results about working memory, but I will
now address that issue in more detail.
©2008 The Aristotelian Society
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, Vol. cviii, Part 3

doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9264.2008.00247.x



NED BLOCK298
Figure 3. Compare this with figure 2 without looking at the two figures side by side.
There is a difference that can be hard to see. I am grateful to Ron Rensink for
supplying this figure.

VII

Working Memory. At a neural level, we can distinguish between
memory that is coded in the active firing of neurons—and ceases
when that neuronal firing ceases—and structural memory that de-
pends on changes in the neural hardware itself, for example, change
in strength of synapses. The active memory—which is active in the
sense that it has to be actively maintained—is sometimes described
as ‘short term’—a misdescription, since it lasts as long as active fir-
ing lasts, which need not be a short time if the subject is actively re-
hearsing. The term ‘working memory’ is used differently by
different people (Cowan 2007), but in this article, the active memo-
ry buffer is called ‘working memory’.

You may have heard of a famous paper by George Miller called
‘The Magical Number Seven, Plus or Minus Two: Some Limits on
Our Capacity for Processing Information’ (Miller 1956). Although
Miller was more circumspect, this paper has been widely cited as a
©2008 The Aristotelian Society
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, Vol. cviii, Part 3

doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9264.2008.00247.x



PHENOMENAL AND ACCESS CONSCIOUSNESS 299
manifesto for the view that there is a single active memory system in
the brain that has a capacity of seven plus or minus two ‘items’.
What is an item? There are some experimental results that fill this
notion in a bit. For example, Huntley-Fenner et al. (2002) showed
that infants’ visual object tracking system—which, there is some
reason to believe, makes use of working memory representations—
does not track piles of sand that are poured, but does track them if
they are rigid. One constraint on what an item might be comes from
some experiments that show that although we can remember only
about four of them, we can also remember up to four features of
each one. Luck and Vogel asked subjects to detect changes in a task
somewhat similar to the Landman et al. task already mentioned.
They found that subjects could detect changes in four features (col-
our, orientation, size, and the presence or absence of a gap in a fig-
ure) without being significantly less accurate than if they were asked
to detect only one feature (Luck and Vogel 1997; Vogel, Woodman
and Luck 2001).

In the fifty years since Miller’s paper, reasons have emerged to
question whether there really is a single active memory system, as
opposed to a small number of linked systems connected to separate
modalities and perhaps separate modules—for example, language.
For example, some brain injuries damage verbal working memory
but not spatial working memory (Basso, Speinnler, Vallar and Zano-
bio 1982), and others have the opposite effect (Hanley, Young and
Pearson 1991). And evidence has accumulated that the capacity of
these working memories—especially visual working memory—is
actually lower than seven items (Cowan 2001; Cowan, Morey and
Chen 2006).

The suggestion of seven items was originally made plausible by
such facts as that if you read people lists of digits, words or letters,
subjects can repeat back about seven of them. Of course, you can re-
peat more items if they can be ‘chunked’. Few Americans will have
trouble holding the following nine letters in mind: fbiciairs—
because they can be chunked into three acronyms.

More relevantly to our discussion, visual working memory exper-
iments also come up with capacities in the vicinity of four—or less
than four items. (For work that suggests less than four, see McElree
2006.) Whether there is one working memory system that is used in
all modalities or overlapping systems that differ to some extent be-
tween modalities, this result is what is relevant to the experiments
©2008 The Aristotelian Society
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, Vol. cviii, Part 3

doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9264.2008.00247.x



NED BLOCK300
discussed above. Another paradigm that comes up with the same
number involves the number of items that people—and monkeys—
can effortlessly keep track of. For example, at a rhesus macaque
monkey colony on a small island off Puerto Rico, Marc Hauser and
his colleagues did the following experiment. Two experimenters find
a monkey relaxing on its own. Each experimenter has a small buck-
et and a pocket full of apple slices. The experimenters put down the
buckets and one at a time, they conspicuously place a small number
of slices in each bucket. Then they withdraw and check which buck-
et the monkey goes to in order to get the apple slices. The result is
that for numbers of slices equal to or smaller than four, the monkeys
overwhelmingly choose the bucket with more slices. But if either
bucket has more than four, the monkeys choose at random. In par-
ticular, monkeys chose the greater number in comparison of one
versus two, two versus three, and three versus four, but chose at ran-
dom in cases of four versus five, four versus six, four versus eight
and, amazingly, three versus eight. The comparison of the three ver-
sus four case (where monkeys reliably chose more) and the three
versus eight case (where they chose at random) is especially telling
(Hauser, Carey and Hauser 2000). The eight apple slices simply
overflowed working memory storage. Infant humans show similar
results, although typically with a limit more in the vicinity of three
rather than four (Feigenson, Carey and Hauser 2002). Using Gra-
ham crackers instead of apple slices, Feigenson et al. found that in-
fants would crawl to the bucket with more crackers in the cases of
one versus two and two versus three, but were at chance in the case
of one versus four. Again, four crackers overflows memory storage.
In one interesting variant, infants are shown a closed container into
which the experimenter—again conspicuously—inserts a small
number of desirable objects (for example, M&Ms). If the number of
M&Ms is one, two or three, the infant continues to reach into the
container until all are removed, but if the number is more than
three, infants reach into the container just once (Feigenson and
Carey 2003).

I should mention that the picture of working memory that I have
been describing is a topic of active dispute. The two opposed models
are the ‘slot’ model that I am relying on, in which working memory
stores a small number of fixed-resolution representations, and a
model according to which working memory is a pool of resources
that can be allocated to many lower resolution representations. The
©2008 The Aristotelian Society
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, Vol. cviii, Part 3

doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9264.2008.00247.x



PHENOMENAL AND ACCESS CONSCIOUSNESS 301
‘slot’ model that I have been describing is described even by propo-
nents of the ‘pool’ model (Bays and Husain 2008) as the ‘dominant
model’. A recent article in Nature (Zhang and Luck 2008) purport-
ed to settle the issue. According to an accompanying editorial,
Zhang and Luck’s paper ‘resolves the matter in favour of the “high
resolution” option’. However, a duelling article in Science (Bays and
Husain 2008) purports to show the opposite, explaining away the
Zhang and Luck result.

One possible resolution is the argument of Xu and Chun (2006)
that there are two different working memory systems with some-
what different brain bases, one of which fits the ‘slot’ model and the
other of which fits the ‘pool’ model. The system that fits the slot
model is spatial and has a limit of four spatial locations or objects at
four different spatial locations, independently of complexity. The
system that fits the pool model is not spatially based.

This dispute raises the difficult methodological issue of what phi-
losophers are supposed to think when the scientists disagree and
whether it makes sense for a philosopher to rely on a controversial
scientific claim. My approach is to use scientific conclusions that are
well confirmed and widely accepted by scientists even if there is
some disagreement. Of course, a single experiment can sometimes
turn the tables. The effect on the reasoning of this paper if the tables
are turned would be a retreat from the claim that the Methodologi-
cal Puzzle has actually been empirically resolved to showing how
empirical data could in principle resolve it.

VIII

The Global Workspace Model. I will be assuming the global work-
space model of cognitive access. The account presupposes a neural
network approach in which there is competition among neural coa-
litions involving both frontal and sensory areas (Koch 2004), the
winning coalitions being conscious. Sensory stimulation causes acti-
vations in sensory areas in the back of the head that compete with
each other to form dominant coalitions (indicated by dark elements
in the outer ring in figure 4). Some of these dominant coalitions trig-
ger central reverberations via long range connections to frontal cor-
tex, setting up activations that help to maintain both the central and
peripheral activations. The idea that some brain areas control acti-
©2008 The Aristotelian Society
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, Vol. cviii, Part 3

doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9264.2008.00247.x



NED BLOCK302
vations and reactivations in other areas is now ubiquitous in neuro-
science (Damasio and Meyer 2008), and one instance of reciprocal
control is one in which workspace networks in frontal areas control
activations in sensory and spatial areas (Curtis and D’Esposito
2003). It is useful in thinking about the account to distinguish be-
tween suppliers and consumers of representations. Perceptual sys-
tems supply representations that are consumed by mechanisms of
reporting, reasoning, evaluating, deciding, and remembering, which
themselves produce representations that are further consumed by
the same set of mechanisms. Once perceptual information is ‘global-
ly broadcast’ in the frontal cortex this way, it is available to all cog-
nitive mechanisms without further processing.

Figure 4. Schematic diagram of the global workspace. Sensory activations in the back of
the brain are symbolized by dots and lines in the outside ring. Dominant senso-
ry neural coalitions (dark lines and dots) compete with one another to trigger
reverberatory activity in the global workspace (located in frontal areas) in the
centre of the diagram. The reverberatory activity in turn maintains the peripher-
al excitation until a new dominant coalition wins out. I am grateful to Stanislas
Dehaene for permission to use this drawing.

One important feature of the global workspace model for philo-
sophical purposes is that it makes it very easy to see a problematic
ambiguity in the term ‘acccessibility’. What is it for a representation
to be cognitively accessible? Is it a matter of actually being in the
global workspace, or is it a matter of potentially being in the global
workspace? Merely potentially in the global workspace would be
too weak for a functional notion that has any hope of being identi-
©2008 The Aristotelian Society
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, Vol. cviii, Part 3

doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9264.2008.00247.x



PHENOMENAL AND ACCESS CONSCIOUSNESS 303
fied with consciousness, as endorsed by many functionalists these
days (for example, Dehaene and Changeux 2004; Dehaene and
Nacchache 2001; Dennett 2001). For example, a completely uncon-
scious representation can be potentially in the global workspace be-
cause it would be in if attention were shifted slightly.

An experimental demonstration that shifting attention affects
phenomenal consciousness to a degree sufficient to change a sub-
threshold stimulus into a supra-threshold stimulus is to be found in
a series of papers by Marisa Carrasco (Carrasco 2007; Carrasco,
Ling and Read 2004) in which she asked subjects to report the ori-
entation of the one of a pair of gratings that had the higher contrast.
She presented an attention-attracting dot on one side of the screen
or the other slightly before the pair of gratings. She showed that at-
tention attracted to one side or the other could make a grating that
was lower in contrast than the comparison seem higher in contrast.
In subsequent work, Carrasco (2007) has been able to show precise-
ly measurable effects of attentional shifts on other phenomenally
conscious qualities, for example, perceived colour saturation.

Dispositional notions like accessibility are notoriously flexible,
depending on context. In this article I will require not just potential
broadcasting for accessibility but actual global broadcasting. Actual
global broadcasting does not itself require that any ‘consuming’ ma-
chinery actually process the broadcast representation, so it is a no-
tion involving potentiality.

Jesse Prinz (2007b) distinguishes between three categories of rep-
resentations: those that are not broadcast to working memory, those
that are broadcast to working memory, and those that are encoded
in working memory. He links consciousness to broadcasting. The
picture he uses is one of a TV station broadcasting operation in
which a movie can be waiting to be broadcast, actually broadcast
but not encoded by any receiver, and encoded. But as attention to
the model of figure 4 shows, there is no distinction between a repre-
sentation having been broadcast and being encoded. What it is for a
representation to be broadcast is for it to be part of a reverberating
circuit including frontal areas and perceptual areas, and if that hap-
pens it is automatically encoded; and further, according to the mod-
el, there is no other kind of encoding in working memory.
©2008 The Aristotelian Society
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, Vol. cviii, Part 3

doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9264.2008.00247.x



NED BLOCK304
IX

Overflow. In this section, I will present the key empirical datum for
my argument, an experiment by Landman et al. (2003). The subject is
shown eight rectangles for half a second (or, in some versions, one
second) as in a of figure 5. There is a dot in the middle which the sub-
ject is supposed to fixate, that is, keep looking at. The array is re-
placed by a blank screen for a variable period. Then another array
appears in which a line points to one of the objects—which may or
may not have changed orientation. In the example shown in figure 5,
there is an orientation change. Using statistical procedures that cor-
rect for guessing, Landman et al. computed a standard capacity meas-
ure showing how many rectangles the subject is able to track. In a,
subjects show a capacity of four items. Thus, the subjects are able to
deploy working memory so as to access only half of the rectangles de-
spite the fact that subjects reported seeing all or almost all of the rec-
tangles. This is a classic ‘change blindness’ result. In b, the indicator
of the rectangle that may or may not change comes on in the first pan-
el. Not surprisingly, subjects can get almost all right: their capacity
measure is almost eight. The crucial manipulation is the last one: the
indicator comes on during the blank after the original rectangles have
gone off. If the subjects are continuing to maintain a visual represen-
tation of the whole array and reading their answers off of it—as sub-
jects say they are doing—the difference between c and b will be
small, and that is in fact what is observed. The capacity measure in c
is between six and seven for up to 1.5 seconds after the first stimulus
has been turned off, suggesting that subjects are able to maintain a
visual representation of the rectangles. This backs up what the sub-
jects say and what William James said about the phenomenal con-
sciousness involved in this kind of case. What is both conscious and
accessible is that there is a circle of rectangles. What is conscious but
in a sense not accessible, is all the specific shapes of the rectangles.

There is some reason to think that the longest lasting visual repre-
sentations of this sort come with practice and when subjects learn to
‘see (and not look)’. Sligte, Lamme and Scholte (2006) did a more
elaborate version of the Landman experiment, finding long persist-
ences, up to four seconds with lots of practice and instructions to re-
lax and let it happen. Others (Long 1980; Yang 1999) have noted
that practice in partial report paradigms makes a big difference in
subjects’ ability to make the experience last.
©2008 The Aristotelian Society
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, Vol. cviii, Part 3

doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9264.2008.00247.x



PHENOMENAL AND ACCESS CONSCIOUSNESS 305
Figure 5. Landman et al.’s change blindness paradigm. The rectangles are displayed here
as line drawings, but the actual stimuli were defined by textures. From Lamme
(2003). I am grateful to Victor Lamme for providing the drawing, and to Elsevi-
er for permission to reprint it.

The main upshot of the Landman and Sligte experiments (at least
on the surface—debunking explanations will be considered later) is
that the subject has persisting experiences as of more specific shapes
than can be brought under the concepts required to report or com-
pare those specific shapes with others. They can all be brought un-
der the concept ‘rectangle’ in the Landman experiment or ‘letter’ in
the Sperling experiment, but not the specific orientation-concept
which would be required to make the comparisons in Landman or
to report the letters in Sperling.

Why are subjects able to gain access to so few of the items that
they see in the first condition of the Landman experiment (i.e. as de-
scribed in a of figure 5)? I am suggesting that the explanation is that
the ‘capacity’ of the visual phenomenal memory system, is greater
©2008 The Aristotelian Society
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, Vol. cviii, Part 3

doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9264.2008.00247.x



NED BLOCK306
than that of the working memory buffer that governs reporting. The
capacity of visual phenomenal memory could be said to be at least
eight to thirty-two objects—at any rate for stimuli of the sort used in
the described experiments. This is suggested by subjects’ reports that
they can see all or almost all eight items in the Landman experiment
and up to thirty-two items in the Sligte experiment in the presented
arrays, and by the experimental manipulations just mentioned in
which subjects can give reports which exhibit the subjects’ apprehen-
sion of all or almost all the items. The lines of converging evidence
mentioned above suggest that the ‘working memory’ system—the
‘global workspace’—has a capacity of about four items (or less) in
adult humans and monkeys and three (or less) in infants.

Given that the capacities of these systems are different, it follows
that the systems themselves cannot completely coincide, and in par-
ticular, there must be something more to the consciousness system
that explains its greater capacity. So it is indeed possible to investi-
gate the difference between consciousness and cognitive accessibili-
ty. This is the basic empirical argument of the paper.

There are two crucial features of the Landman phenomenon for
my purposes. The most obvious one is the high capacity phenome-
nal consciousness just mentioned, but it is also important that this
high capacity phenomenal consciousness occurs after the stimulus is
long gone, because it is no news that there are lots of things in the
world and high capacity representations in the retina! A crucial part
of my argument—left out here for reasons of space—is to detail the
evidence that the high capacity depends most proximally on con-
scious representations themselves. See Block (2007a, 2007b).

X

Generic versus Specific Phenomenal Consciousness. A key concept in
the argument alluded to above but not explicitly is the distinction be-
tween generic and specific contents of phenomenal consciousness
(Block 2007a, 2007b; Burge 2007; Byrne, Hilbert and Siegel 2007;
Grush 2007; Levine 2007; Papineau 2007). In the Landman experi-
ment, the relevant generic phenomenal content would be the phenom-
enal presentation that there is a circle of rectangles. The relevant
specific phenomenal content would be a phenomenal presentation
that specifies for each of the rectangles (or anyway, most of them)
©2008 The Aristotelian Society
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, Vol. cviii, Part 3

doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9264.2008.00247.x



PHENOMENAL AND ACCESS CONSCIOUSNESS 307
whether it is horizontal or vertical. My argument was that before the
cue, there is specific phenomenal content for all or almost all items. (I
also think there is generic phenomenal content before the cue, but that
does not figure in the argument.) This specific phenomenal content is
what justifies the claim that the capacity of the phenomenal system is
more than four, whereas the capacity of the access system is four or
less, and thus that the two systems cannot completely coincide. But
critics (Byrne et al. 2007; Papineau 2007) have challenged the premiss
that there are more than four items of specific phenomenal content be-
fore the cue. It is important to recognize that the objectors have to
agree that before the cue there are specific (not just generic) visual rep-
resentations of all or almost all of the eight to thirty-two items. There
have to be such specific representations, given that any location can be
cued with high accuracy of response. The locus of controversy is
whether those specific representations are phenomenally conscious.

A number of critics (Byrne et al. 2007; Naccache and Dehaene
2007; van Gulick 2007) have alleged that subjects are subject to a
kind of illusion that they have rich specific phenomenal conscious-
ness. The illusion could be said to be a product of two factors, that
the subjects have generic phenomenal content (to the effect that
there are five to ten rectangles arranged in a circle) and that when
they attend to a specific location, they find that they have specific
phenomenal content for that location. According to the objection,
the ‘refrigerator light illusion’ leads subjects to suppose that they
have rich specific phenomenal content even though their specific
phenomenal content is really sparse.

What shows that there is rich specific phenomenally conscious
content (in addition to the agreed-on generic phenomenally con-
scious content)? First, subjects consistently say that they are simply
basing their answers on their visual experience. In the Sligte version
of the Landman experiment, the visual experiences last for four to
five seconds, and it is plausible that subjects would be likely to be
accurate about something they see for such a long period. Second,
subjects are attending to arrays in full view in good viewing condi-
tions to stimuli that last between half a second and a second, more
than enough time for specific phenomenal content. Third, it is not
easy to understand what the alternative is. Is the idea that there is
literally zero specific phenomenally conscious content of the rectan-
gles before the cue, and then one item of specific phenomenally con-
scious content after the cue, as indicated in figure 6? It does seem as
©2008 The Aristotelian Society
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, Vol. cviii, Part 3

doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9264.2008.00247.x



NED BLOCK308
if the phenomenal content were as depicted in figure 6, subjects
could report that, which they very much do not do. Or perhaps the
phenomenal content is as depicted in figure 7. Before the cue, a ran-
dom collection of half the rectangles are specifically conscious.
However, that random collection could be expected to contain the
item that is cued only half the time. So half the time, one of the spe-
cifically conscious items would have to disappear, replaced by the
cued item as depicted on the right side of figure 7. I have never
heard of any subject reporting any such thing in any of the myriad
experiments of this type. There are other hypotheses as well, but I
can’t think of any—even ones that are not easily picturable—that
fit at all well with reported phenomenal consciousness of subjects. A
better account is that subjects should be believed in saying that they
have experiences of all or most of the rectangles, that is, specific
phenomenal contents. Fourth, there is evidence that the subjects’
representations are a kind of mental image. In one variation, Land-
man et al. did the same experiment as before but changed the size of
the rectangles rather than the orientation, and then in a final experi-

Figure 7. Hypothesis 2 concerning specific phenomenal consciousness in the Landman et
al. experiment.

Figure 6. Hypothesis 1 concerning specific phenomenal consciousness in the Landman et
al. experiment.
©2008 The Aristotelian Society
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, Vol. cviii, Part 3

doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9264.2008.00247.x



PHENOMENAL AND ACCESS CONSCIOUSNESS 309
ment changed either the size or the orientation. The interesting re-
sult is that subjects were no worse at detecting changes in either ori-
entation or size than they were at detecting changes in size alone.
That suggests that the subjects have a representation of the rectan-
gles that combines size and orientation from which either one can
be recovered with no loss due to the dual task, again backing up
subjects’ reports that indicate a kind of visual imagery.

Here is a fifth consideration: Vincent Di Lollo (1980) originated a
paradigm using a five-by-five grid in which all but one of the
squares is filled with a dot. Subjects see a partial grid with twelve of
the dots filled in, then after a delay, another partial grid with a dif-
ferent twelve dots filled in. The subjects’ task is to report which
square has a missing dot, something they can do easily if they have a
visual impression as of the whole matrix of dots. Loftus and Irwin
(1998) show that subjects’ ability to do the task correlates nearly
perfectly with their phenomenological judgements of whether there
appears to be a whole matrix rather than two partial matrices.
Brockmole, Wang and Irwin (2002) delayed the appearance of the
second partial grid for as long as five seconds, telling subjects that a
good strategy was to ‘imagine the dots still being present after they
disappeared’ (2002, p. 317). Subjects had to remember the first par-
tial grid and superimpose it on the second partial grid (which was
still on the screen) to see where the missing dot was. The subjects’
memory capacity for the twelve dots in the first grid can be comput-
ed by the type of errors made. When the delay between the first and
second partial grids is 100 ms, the subjects’ retention capacity falls
from twelve to 4.1 of the dots in the first partial grid (see figure 8).
The striking result was that with delays over 100 ms, subjects’ ca-
pacity then increased, asymptoting at a delay of about 1.5 seconds,
at which time their capacity was more than ten of twelve dots, and
the capacity stayed that high for delays up to four to five seconds.
(See the dotted line in figure 8, which represents the percentage of
dots remembered from the first partial grid.) Independent estimates
of the time to generate a mental image by Kosslyn (Kosslyn,
Thompson and Ganis 2006) are between one and two seconds, and
the authors argue that the subjects were following instructions, gen-
erating a visual image of the first array, and integrating that visual
image with the percept of the second array. This result constitutes
converging evidence for high capacity specific phenomenal con-
sciousness: the subjects say they have an image, and what they say is
©2008 The Aristotelian Society
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, Vol. cviii, Part 3

doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9264.2008.00247.x



NED BLOCK310
confirmed by their performance. The upshot is that there is a com-
pletely different paradigm in which the evidence favours high capac-
ity specific phenomenal consciousness.

Figure 8. In Brockmole et al.’s experiment, a twelve-dot partial grid is presented briefly,
then a period of time elapses (the interstimulus interval), then a second twelve-dot
partial grid is presented and stays on the screen. The subjects are asked to report
the missing dot. This graph shows that for interstimulus intervals between one
and five seconds, subjects are very accurate in reporting the missing dot. From
Brockmole et al. (2002). With permission of the American Psychological Associ-
ation. I am grateful to James Brockmole for providing me with a redrawn figure.

Of course, my eventual conclusion is that people can be dramatically
mistaken about their own experience, so some critics may use that as
a reason to say that subjects in the Landman and Sligte and Brock-
mole experiments are dramatically mistaken about the contents of
their own phenomenal consciousness. But there is no reason to dis-
trust these subjects, whereas the subject GK, mentioned earlier, does
have brain damage that prevents attention to the left side of space
©2008 The Aristotelian Society
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, Vol. cviii, Part 3

doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9264.2008.00247.x



PHENOMENAL AND ACCESS CONSCIOUSNESS 311
when there is a competing stimulus on the right, so there is a real
question as to whether he might see something on the left that he
cannot report because of lack of attention. Further, in visuo-spatial
extinction generally, the subject’s claim not to see the object on the
left is often combined with the ability to make comparisons between
the thing on the left and the thing on the right (Verfaellie, Milberg,
McGlinchey-Berroth, Grande and D’Esposito 1995; Volpe, LeDoux
and Gazzaniga 1979). For example, when asked to make a ‘same/dif-
ferent’ comparison between objects on the left and right, two of the
subjects in the Volpe et al. experiment asserted ‘that the task was
“silly”’, since there was no stimulus on the left, but these subjects
were nonetheless more than 88% correct on the same/different
judgements.

XI

Panpsychic Disaster. A number of commentators argued that once
you give up the special authority of reports, you will have no way of
avoiding attributing consciousness to lampposts. Papineau (2007)
notes that I regard some states as uncontroversially unconscious and
wonders ‘what makes a state “uncontroversially unconscious” if it
is not that subjects tell us so’. He argues that once we allow that a
state can be conscious even though normal subjects systematically
deny it, there may be no uncontroversially unconscious states. Prinz
(2007a) says, ‘Block must either concede that reports are authorita-
tive or deny that we can rule out the possibility of conscious states
in v1, the lgn, and the retinae.’

However, it is obvious that reports fail to be authoritative. In An-
ton’s syndrome, subjects are blind but think and report that they see.
More generally, anosognosics deny their perceptual and motor disa-
bilities, making all sorts of false reports about their own experience.
Generally, in cognitive neuroscience, aspects of phenomena found in
brain-damaged patients can be produced in some degree in normal
subjects with stimuli that are degraded or speeded or in other stress-
ful conditions. Introspective reports do have a certain priority: we
have no choice but to start with reports in investigating conscious-
ness. But reports can be overridden on the basis of theory—that is
itself based on other reports. One very notable form of empirical ev-
idence that can conflict with reports is evidence about subjects’ deci-
©2008 The Aristotelian Society
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, Vol. cviii, Part 3

doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9264.2008.00247.x



NED BLOCK312
sion process evaluated according to signal detection theory
(Snodgrass and Lepisto 2007). The signal detection theory perspec-
tive dictates that there is no such thing as a raw report uncontami-
nated by decision processes.

XII

Conclusion. I started with a methodological puzzle which in one
form is: how could we possibly find out whether there can be con-
scious experience without the cognitive accessibility required for re-
porting conscious experience, since any evidence would have to
derive from reports that themselves derive from that cognitive acces-
sibility? I then argued that the method of inference to the best expla-
nation can in principle allow for evidence that separates phenomenal
consciousness from cognitive accessibility, since the overall model in
which phenomenal consciousness goes beyond cognitive accessibility
might turn out to be better supported than the alternatives. I then de-
scribed the controversy over rich versus sparse phenomenal con-
sciousness and argued that the sparse phenomenal consciousness
point of view fits naturally with the view that phenomenal conscious-
ness does not go beyond cognitive accessibility. Finally, I presented
evidence for a point of view that combines rich phenomenal con-
sciousness with a picture of phenomenal consciousness as depending
on at least somewhat different machinery from cognitive accessibili-
ty. Of course, this does not show that there can be phenomenal con-
sciousness without cognitive accessibility as entertained in the case of
patient GK, but it does take a step in that direction.

Department of Philosophy
New York University

Room 405
5 Washington Place

New York, ny 10003
usa

ned.block@nyu.edu
©2008 The Aristotelian Society
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, Vol. cviii, Part 3

doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9264.2008.00247.x



PHENOMENAL AND ACCESS CONSCIOUSNESS 313
REFERENCES

Aimola Davies, A. M. 2004: ‘Disorders of spatial orientation and aware-
ness’. Cognitive and Behavioral Rehabilitation: From Neurobiology to
Clinical Practice, pp. 175–223. New York: The Guilford Press.

Alkire, M. T. 2008: ‘General Anesthesia and Consciousness’. In S. Laureys
(ed.), The Neurology of Consciousness: Cognitive Neuroscience and
Neuropathology. Amsterdam: Elsevier.

——and J. Miller 2005: ‘General anesthesia and the neural correlates of
consciousness’. Progress in Brain Research, 150, pp. 229–44.

Basso, A., H. Speinnler, G. Vallar and M. E. Zanobio 1982: ‘Left hemi-
sphere damage and selective impairment of auditory verbal short term
memory: A case study’. Neuropsychologia, 20, pp. 263–74.

Bays, P. M., and M. Husain 2008: ‘Dynamic Shifts of Limited Working
Memory Resources in Human Vision’. Science, 321, pp. 851–4.

Block, N. 2001: ‘Paradox and cross purposes in recent work on conscious-
ness’. Cognition, 79(1–2), pp. 197–220.

——2005: ‘Two Neural Correlates of Consciousness’. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 9(2), pp. 46–52.

——2007a: ‘Consciousness, accessibility, and the mesh between psychology
and neuroscience’. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 30, pp. 481–548.

——2007b: ‘Overflow, access and attention’. Behavioral and Brain Scienc-
es, 30, pp. 530–42.

——forthcoming: ‘Comparing the major theories of consciousness’. In
M. S. Gazzaniga (ed.), The Cognitive Neurosciences iv. Cambridge, ma:
MIT Press.

Boghossian, P. A. 2006: Fear of Knowledge: Against Relativism and Con-
structivism. New York: Oxford University Press.

Brockmole, J. R., R. F. Wang and D. E. Irwin 2002: ‘Temporal Integration
Between Visual Images and Visual Percepts’. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 28(2), pp. 315–34.

Burge, T. 2007: ‘Psychology supports independence of phenomenal con-
sciousness’. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 30(5/6), pp. 500–1.

Byrne, A., D. R. Hilbert and S. Siegel 2007: ‘Do we see more than we can
access?’. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 30(5/6), pp. 501–2.

Carrasco, M. 2007: ‘Attention, cognitive models of’. In P. Wilken, T. Bayne
and A. Cleeremans (eds.), Oxford Companion to Consciousness. Ox-
ford: Oxford University Press.

Carrasco, M., S. Ling and S. Read 2004: ‘Attention alters appearance’. Na-
ture Neuroscience, 7, pp. 308–13.

Chalmers, D. 2000: ‘What is a Neural Correlate of Consciousness?’. In
T. Metzinger (ed.), Neural Correlates of Consciousness: Empirical and
Conceptual Issues, pp. 17–40. Cambridge, ma: MIT Press.
©2008 The Aristotelian Society
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, Vol. cviii, Part 3

doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9264.2008.00247.x



NED BLOCK314
Cowan, N. 2001: ‘The magical number 4 in short-term memory: A recon-
sideration of mental storage capacity’. Behavioral and Brain Sciences,
24, pp. 87–185.

——2007: ‘What are the differences between long-term, short-term and
working memory?’. In W. Sossin, J.-C. Jacaille, V. F. Castellucci and
S. Belleville (eds.), The Essence of Memory. Amsterdam: Elsevier/Aca-
demic Press.

——C. Morey and Z. Chen 2006: ‘The Legend of the Magical Number Sev-
en’. In S. Della Sala (ed.), Tall Tales About the Brain: Things We Think We
Know About the Mind, But Ain’t So. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Curtis, C., and M. D’Esposito 2003: ‘Persistent activity in the prefrontal
cortex during working memory’. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 7(9),
pp. 415–23.

Damasio, A., and K. Meyer 2008: ‘Behind the looking-glass’. Nature, 454,
pp. 167–8.

Dehaene, S., and L. Nacchache 2001: ‘Towards a cognitive neuroscience of
consciousness: Basic evidence and a workspace framework’. Cognition,
79, pp. 1–37.

Dehaene, S., and J.-P. Changeux 2004: ‘Neural mechanisms for access to
consciousness’. In M. Gazzaniga (ed.), The Cognitive Neurosciences iii,
pp. 1145–58. Cambridge, ma: MIT Press.

——L. Nacchache, J. Sackur and C. Sergent 2006: ‘Conscious, precon-
scious, and subliminal processing: a testable taxonomy’. Trends in Cog-
nitive Sciences, 10, pp. 204–11.

Dennett, D. C. 1991: Consciousness Explained. Boston, ma: Little, Brown.
——2001: ‘Are we explaining consciousness yet?’. Cognition, 79, pp. 221–37.
Di Lollo, V. 1980: ‘Temporal integration in visual memory’. Journal of Ex-

perimental Psychology: General, 109, pp. 75–97.
Dretske, F. 2004: ‘Change Blindness’. Philosophical Studies, 120(1–3),

pp. 1–18.
Driver, J., and P. Vuilleumier 2001: ‘Perceptual awareness and its loss in

unilateral neglect and extinction’. Cognition, 79(1–2), pp. 39–88.
Feigenson, L., and S. Carey 2003: ‘Tracking individuals via object files: Evi-

dence from infants’ manual search’. Developmental Science, 6, pp. 568–
84.

—— and M. Hauser 2002: ‘The representations underlying infants’ choice
of more: Object files vs. analog magnitudes’. Psychological Science, 13,
pp. 150–6.

Grush, R. 2007: ‘A plug for generic phenomenology’. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 30(5/6), pp. 504–5.

Hanley, J. R., H. W. Young and N. A. Pearson 1991: ‘Impairment of visuo-
spatial sketch pad’. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 43a,
pp. 101–25.
©2008 The Aristotelian Society
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, Vol. cviii, Part 3

doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9264.2008.00247.x



PHENOMENAL AND ACCESS CONSCIOUSNESS 315
Harman, G. 1965: ‘The Inference to the Best Explanation’. Philosophical
Review, 74(1), pp. 88–95.

Hauser, M., S. Carey and L. Hauser 2000: ‘Spontaneous number represen-
tation in semi-free ranging rhesus monkeys’. Proceedings of the Royal
Society of London: Biological Sciences, 267, pp. 829–33.

Huntley-Fenner, G., S. Carey and A. Solimando 2002: ‘Objects are individ-
uals but stuff doesn’t count: Perceived rigidity and cohesiveness influence
infants’ representations of small numbers of discrete entities’. Cognition,
85, pp. 203–21.

Kanwisher, N. 2001: ‘Neural events and perceptual awareness’. Cognition,
79, pp. 89–113.

Koch, C. 2004: The Quest for Consciousness: A Neurobiological Ap-
proach. Englewood, co: Roberts and Company.

Kosslyn, S. M., W. L. Thompson and G. Ganis 2006: The Case for Mental
Imagery. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Lamme, V. 2003: ‘Why visual attention and awareness are different’.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 7, pp. 12–18.

Landman, R., H. Spekreijse and V. A. F. Lamme 2003: ‘Large capacity stor-
age of integrated objects before change blindness’. Vision Research, 43,
pp. 149–64.

Levine, J. 1983: ‘Materialism and Qualia: the Explanatory Gap’. Pacific
Philosophical Quarterly, 64, pp. 354–61.

——2007: ‘Two kinds of access’. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 30(5/6),
pp. 514–15.

Loftus, G., and D. Irwin 1998: ‘On the Relations among Different Meas-
ures of Visible and Informational Persistence’. Cognitive Psychology, 35,
pp. 135–99.

Long, G. 1980: ‘Iconic Memory: A review and critique of the study of short
term visual storage’. Psychological Bulletin, 88, pp. 785–820.

Luck, S. J., and E. K. Vogel 1997: ‘The capacity of visual working memory
for features and conjunctions’. Nature, 390, pp. 279–81.

McElree, B. 2006: ‘Accessing Recent Events’. In B. H. Ross (ed.), The Psy-
chology of Learning and Motivation, vol. 46, pp. 155–201. San Diego:
Academic Press.

Miller, G. 1956: ‘The Magical Number Seven, Plus or Minus Two: Some
Limits on Our Capacity for Processing Information’. Psychological Re-
view, 63, pp. 81–97.

Naccache, L., and S. Dehaene 2007: ‘Reportability and illusions of phe-
nomenality in the light of the global neuronal workspace model’. Behav-
ioral and Brain Sciences, 30, pp. 518–19.

Nagel, T. 1974: ‘What Is it Like to Be a Bat?’. Philosophical Review, 83(4),
pp. 435–50.

Noë, A. 2004: Action in Perception. Cambridge, ma: MIT Press.
©2008 The Aristotelian Society
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, Vol. cviii, Part 3

doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9264.2008.00247.x



NED BLOCK316
O’Craven, K., and N. Kanwisher 2000: ‘Mental imagery of faces and places
activates corresponding stimulus-specific brain regions’. Journal of Cog-
nitive Neuroscience, 12, pp. 1013–23.

O’Regan, J. K., and A. Noë 2001: ‘A sensorimotor approach to vision and
visual consciousness’. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 24, pp. 883–975.

Papineau, D. 2007: ‘Reuniting (scene) phenomenology with (scene) access’.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 30(5/6), p. 521.

Peirce, C. S. 1903: Collected Papers of Charles Sanders Peirce. Cambridge,
ma: Harvard University Press.

Peli, E., and D. Peli 2002: Driving with Confidence: A Practical Guide to
Driving with Low Vision. Singapore: World Scientific Publishing Com-
pany.

Prinz, J. J. 2007a: ‘Accessed, accessible, and inaccessible: Where to draw
the phenomenal line’. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 30, pp. 521–2.

——2007b: ‘Mental Pointing: Phenomenal Knowledge without Phenome-
nal Concepts’. Journal Of Consciousness Studies, 14(9–10), pp. 184–
211.

Rees, G., E. Wojciulik, K. Clarke, M. Husain, C. Frith and J. Driver 2000:
‘Unconscious activations of visual cortex in the damaged right hemi-
sphere of a parietal patient with extinction’. Brain, 123(8), pp. 1624–33.

——2002: ‘Neural correlates of conscious and unconscious vision in pari-
etal extinction’. Neurocase, 8, pp. 387–93.

Shoemaker, S. 1981: ‘Some Varieties of Functionalism’. Philosophical Top-
ics, 12, pp. 93–119.

Simons, D. J., and M. Ambinder 2005: ‘Change blindness: Theory and Con-
sequences’. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 14, pp. 44–8.

Sligte, I. G., V. A. F. Lamme and H. S. Scholte 2006: ‘Capacity Limits to
Awareness’. Paper presented at the Association for the Scientific Study of
Consciousness, Oxford, uk.

Snodgrass, M., and S. A. Lepisto 2007: ‘Access for what? Reflective con-
sciousness’. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 30(5/6), pp. 525–6.

Tong, F., K. Nakayama, J. T. Vaughan and N. Kanwisher 1998: ‘Binocular
Rivalry and Visual Awareness in Human Extrastriate Cortex’. Neuron,
21(4), pp. 753–9.

Tononi, G., and C. Koch 2008: ‘The Neural Correlates of Consciousness:
An Update’. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1124,
pp. 239–61.

Uebel, T. 2006: ‘Vienna Circle’. The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy,
Fall 2006 edition, ed. Edward N. Zalta.

van Gulick, R. 2007: ‘What if phenomenal consciousness admits of de-
grees?’. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 30(5/6), pp. 528–9.

Verfaellie, M., W. P. Milberg, R. McGlinchey-Berroth, L. Grande and
M. D’Esposito 1995: ‘Comparison of cross-field matching and forced-
©2008 The Aristotelian Society
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, Vol. cviii, Part 3

doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9264.2008.00247.x



PHENOMENAL AND ACCESS CONSCIOUSNESS 317
choice identification in hemispatial neglect’. Neuropsychology, 9,
pp. 427–34.

Vogel, E. K., G. F. Woodman and S. J. Luck 2001: ‘Storage of features, con-
junctions and objects in visual working memory’. Journal of Experimen-
tal Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 27, pp. 92–114.

Volpe, B. T., J. E. LeDoux and M. S. Gazzaniga 1979: ‘Information process-
ing of visual stimuli in an extinguished field’. Nature, 282, pp. 722–4.

Xu, Y., and M. M. Chun 2006: ‘Dissociable neural mechanisms supporting
visual short-term memory for objects’. Nature, 440 (2 March), pp. 91–5.

Yang, W. 1999: Lifetime of Human Visual Sensory Memory: Properties and
Neural Substrate. New York: New York UniversityPress.

Zeki, S. 2001: ‘Localization and globalization in conscious vision’. Annual
Review of Neuroscience, 24, pp. 57–86.

——and A. Bartels 1999: ‘Toward a theory of visual consciousness’. Con-
sciousness and Cognition, 8, pp. 225–59.

Zhang, W., and S. J. Luck 2008: ‘Discrete fixed-resolution representations
in visual working memory’. Nature, 453, pp. 233–7.
©2008 The Aristotelian Society
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, Vol. cviii, Part 3

doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9264.2008.00247.x


	Consciousness and Cognitive Access - Ned Block
	I. Introduction
	II. An Illustration
	III. The Self
	IV. The Methodological Puzzle
	V. The Solution
	VI. Rich versus Sparse Experience
	VII. Working Memory
	VIII. The Global Workspace Model
	IX. Overflow
	X. Generic versus Specific Phenomenal Consciousness
	XI. Panpsychic Disaster
	XII. Conclusion
	References


















<<
  /ASCII85EncodePages false
  /AllowTransparency false
  /AutoPositionEPSFiles true
  /AutoRotatePages /All
  /Binding /Left
  /CalGrayProfile (Dot Gain 20%)
  /CalRGBProfile (sRGB IEC61966-2.1)
  /CalCMYKProfile (U.S. Web Coated \050SWOP\051 v2)
  /sRGBProfile (sRGB IEC61966-2.1)
  /CannotEmbedFontPolicy /Error
  /CompatibilityLevel 1.2
  /CompressObjects /Tags
  /CompressPages true
  /ConvertImagesToIndexed true
  /PassThroughJPEGImages true
  /CreateJDFFile false
  /CreateJobTicket false
  /DefaultRenderingIntent /Default
  /DetectBlends true
  /ColorConversionStrategy /LeaveColorUnchanged
  /DoThumbnails true
  /EmbedAllFonts true
  /EmbedJobOptions true
  /DSCReportingLevel 0
  /EmitDSCWarnings false
  /EndPage -1
  /ImageMemory 1048576
  /LockDistillerParams false
  /MaxSubsetPct 100
  /Optimize true
  /OPM 1
  /ParseDSCComments true
  /ParseDSCCommentsForDocInfo true
  /PreserveCopyPage true
  /PreserveEPSInfo true
  /PreserveHalftoneInfo false
  /PreserveOPIComments false
  /PreserveOverprintSettings true
  /StartPage 1
  /SubsetFonts true
  /TransferFunctionInfo /Apply
  /UCRandBGInfo /Preserve
  /UsePrologue false
  /ColorSettingsFile ()
  /AlwaysEmbed [ true
  ]
  /NeverEmbed [ true
  ]
  /AntiAliasColorImages false
  /DownsampleColorImages true
  /ColorImageDownsampleType /Average
  /ColorImageResolution 299
  /ColorImageDepth -1
  /ColorImageDownsampleThreshold 1.50167
  /EncodeColorImages true
  /ColorImageFilter /DCTEncode
  /AutoFilterColorImages true
  /ColorImageAutoFilterStrategy /JPEG
  /ColorACSImageDict <<
    /QFactor 0.15
    /HSamples [1 1 1 1] /VSamples [1 1 1 1]
  >>
  /ColorImageDict <<
    /QFactor 0.15
    /HSamples [1 1 1 1] /VSamples [1 1 1 1]
  >>
  /JPEG2000ColorACSImageDict <<
    /TileWidth 256
    /TileHeight 256
    /Quality 30
  >>
  /JPEG2000ColorImageDict <<
    /TileWidth 256
    /TileHeight 256
    /Quality 30
  >>
  /AntiAliasGrayImages false
  /DownsampleGrayImages true
  /GrayImageDownsampleType /Bicubic
  /GrayImageResolution 300
  /GrayImageDepth -1
  /GrayImageDownsampleThreshold 1.50000
  /EncodeGrayImages true
  /GrayImageFilter /DCTEncode
  /AutoFilterGrayImages true
  /GrayImageAutoFilterStrategy /JPEG
  /GrayACSImageDict <<
    /QFactor 0.15
    /HSamples [1 1 1 1] /VSamples [1 1 1 1]
  >>
  /GrayImageDict <<
    /QFactor 0.15
    /HSamples [1 1 1 1] /VSamples [1 1 1 1]
  >>
  /JPEG2000GrayACSImageDict <<
    /TileWidth 256
    /TileHeight 256
    /Quality 30
  >>
  /JPEG2000GrayImageDict <<
    /TileWidth 256
    /TileHeight 256
    /Quality 30
  >>
  /AntiAliasMonoImages false
  /DownsampleMonoImages true
  /MonoImageDownsampleType /Bicubic
  /MonoImageResolution 1200
  /MonoImageDepth -1
  /MonoImageDownsampleThreshold 1.50000
  /EncodeMonoImages true
  /MonoImageFilter /CCITTFaxEncode
  /MonoImageDict <<
    /K -1
  >>
  /AllowPSXObjects false
  /PDFX1aCheck false
  /PDFX3Check false
  /PDFXCompliantPDFOnly false
  /PDFXNoTrimBoxError true
  /PDFXTrimBoxToMediaBoxOffset [
    0.00000
    0.00000
    0.00000
    0.00000
  ]
  /PDFXSetBleedBoxToMediaBox true
  /PDFXBleedBoxToTrimBoxOffset [
    0.00000
    0.00000
    0.00000
    0.00000
  ]
  /PDFXOutputIntentProfile (None)
  /PDFXOutputCondition ()
  /PDFXRegistryName ()
  /PDFXTrapped /False

  /DetectCurves 0.000000
  /EmbedOpenType false
  /ParseICCProfilesInComments true
  /PreserveDICMYKValues true
  /PreserveFlatness true
  /CropColorImages true
  /ColorImageMinResolution 300
  /ColorImageMinResolutionPolicy /OK
  /ColorImageMinDownsampleDepth 1
  /CropGrayImages true
  /GrayImageMinResolution 300
  /GrayImageMinResolutionPolicy /OK
  /GrayImageMinDownsampleDepth 2
  /CropMonoImages true
  /MonoImageMinResolution 1200
  /MonoImageMinResolutionPolicy /OK
  /CheckCompliance [
    /None
  ]
  /PDFXOutputConditionIdentifier ()
  /Description <<
    /CHS <FEFF4f7f75288fd94e9b8bbe5b9a521b5efa7684002000500044004600206587686353ef901a8fc7684c976262535370673a548c002000700072006f006f00660065007200208fdb884c9ad88d2891cf62535370300260a853ef4ee54f7f75280020004100630072006f0062006100740020548c002000410064006f00620065002000520065006100640065007200200035002e003000204ee553ca66f49ad87248672c676562535f00521b5efa768400200050004400460020658768633002>
    /CHT <FEFF4f7f752890194e9b8a2d7f6e5efa7acb7684002000410064006f006200650020005000440046002065874ef653ef5728684c9762537088686a5f548c002000700072006f006f00660065007200204e0a73725f979ad854c18cea7684521753706548679c300260a853ef4ee54f7f75280020004100630072006f0062006100740020548c002000410064006f00620065002000520065006100640065007200200035002e003000204ee553ca66f49ad87248672c4f86958b555f5df25efa7acb76840020005000440046002065874ef63002>
    /DAN <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>
    /DEU <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>
    /ESP <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>
    /FRA <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>
    /ITA <FEFF005500740069006c0069007a007a006100720065002000710075006500730074006500200069006d0070006f007300740061007a0069006f006e00690020007000650072002000630072006500610072006500200064006f00630075006d0065006e00740069002000410064006f006200650020005000440046002000700065007200200075006e00610020007300740061006d007000610020006400690020007100750061006c0069007400e00020007300750020007300740061006d00700061006e0074006900200065002000700072006f006f0066006500720020006400650073006b0074006f0070002e0020004900200064006f00630075006d0065006e007400690020005000440046002000630072006500610074006900200070006f00730073006f006e006f0020006500730073006500720065002000610070006500720074006900200063006f006e0020004100630072006f00620061007400200065002000410064006f00620065002000520065006100640065007200200035002e003000200065002000760065007200730069006f006e006900200073007500630063006500730073006900760065002e>
    /JPN <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>
    /KOR <FEFFc7740020c124c815c7440020c0acc6a9d558c5ec0020b370c2a4d06cd0d10020d504b9b0d1300020bc0f0020ad50c815ae30c5d0c11c0020ace0d488c9c8b85c0020c778c1c4d560002000410064006f0062006500200050004400460020bb38c11cb97c0020c791c131d569b2c8b2e4002e0020c774b807ac8c0020c791c131b41c00200050004400460020bb38c11cb2940020004100630072006f0062006100740020bc0f002000410064006f00620065002000520065006100640065007200200035002e00300020c774c0c1c5d0c11c0020c5f40020c2180020c788c2b5b2c8b2e4002e>
    /NLD (Gebruik deze instellingen om Adobe PDF-documenten te maken voor kwaliteitsafdrukken op desktopprinters en proofers. De gemaakte PDF-documenten kunnen worden geopend met Acrobat en Adobe Reader 5.0 en hoger.)
    /NOR <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>
    /PTB <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>
    /SUO <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>
    /SVE <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>
    /ENG ()
    /ENU <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>
  >>
  /Namespace [
    (Adobe)
    (Common)
    (1.0)
  ]
  /OtherNamespaces [
    <<
      /AsReaderSpreads false
      /CropImagesToFrames true
      /ErrorControl /WarnAndContinue
      /FlattenerIgnoreSpreadOverrides false
      /IncludeGuidesGrids false
      /IncludeNonPrinting false
      /IncludeSlug false
      /Namespace [
        (Adobe)
        (InDesign)
        (4.0)
      ]
      /OmitPlacedBitmaps false
      /OmitPlacedEPS false
      /OmitPlacedPDF false
      /SimulateOverprint /Legacy
    >>
    <<
      /AddBleedMarks false
      /AddColorBars false
      /AddCropMarks false
      /AddPageInfo false
      /AddRegMarks false
      /ConvertColors /NoConversion
      /DestinationProfileName ()
      /DestinationProfileSelector /NA
      /Downsample16BitImages true
      /FlattenerPreset <<
        /PresetSelector /MediumResolution
      >>
      /FormElements false
      /GenerateStructure true
      /IncludeBookmarks false
      /IncludeHyperlinks false
      /IncludeInteractive false
      /IncludeLayers false
      /IncludeProfiles true
      /MultimediaHandling /UseObjectSettings
      /Namespace [
        (Adobe)
        (CreativeSuite)
        (2.0)
      ]
      /PDFXOutputIntentProfileSelector /NA
      /PreserveEditing true
      /UntaggedCMYKHandling /LeaveUntagged
      /UntaggedRGBHandling /LeaveUntagged
      /UseDocumentBleed false
    >>
  ]
>> setdistillerparams
<<
  /HWResolution [600 600]
  /PageSize [612.000 792.000]
>> setpagedevice

