



































phpe_121.dvi


Philosophical Perspectives, 21, Philosophy of Mind, 2007

WITTGENSTEIN AND QUALIA1

Ned Block
New York University

(Wittgenstein, 1968) endorsed one kind of inverted spectrum hypothesis and
rejected another. This paper argues that the kind of inverted spectrum hypothesis
that Wittgenstein endorsed (the “innocuous” inverted spectrum hypothesis) is the
thin end of the wedge that precludes a Wittgensteinian critique of the kind of
inverted spectrum hypothesis he rejected (the “dangerous” kind). The danger
of the dangerous kind is that it provides an argument for qualia, where qualia
are (for the purposes of this paper) contents of experiential states which cannot
be fully captured in natural language. I will pinpoint the difference between the
innocuous and dangerous scenarios that matters for the argument for qualia, give
arguments in favor of the coherence and possibility of the dangerous scenario,
and try to show that some standard arguments against inverted spectra are
ineffective against the version of the dangerous scenario I will be advocating.
The leading idea of the paper is that an argument for qualia based on spectrum
inversion does not require that the inversion be behaviorally indistinguishable.
At one crucial point, I will rely on a less controversial version of an argument
I gave in Block (1999). Wittgenstein’s views provide a convenient starting point
for a paper that is much more about qualia than about Wittgenstein.

1. Introduction

The content of an experiential state can often be described in public language
partly in terms of qualities of objects that bear some salient relation to the state,
for example, “looks red” or “feels like sandpaper” or “smells rotten”, but it is
the contention of this paper that public language terms including terms for such
properties of objects do not fully capture the contents. Qualia in my terminology
are ways things look red or feel like sandpaper or smell rotten. If things can
look red in more than one way—as I will be arguing—“looks red” does not fully
capture the content of the state. Qualia can be referred to in public language, for
example as the quale I get when I see green things. But that way of referring to



74 / Ned Block

the quale does not fully capture its content—it does not capture the individuating
particularity about the way that I see green that is different from the way others
may see green. Similarly, I can refer to the content of a thought as “the content
of the thought I had at 11:33 AM” without fully capturing its content.2

We have a notion of the content of an utterance or thought which can be
fully captured without specifying anything about modes of presentation. If I say
“Napoleon is buried in Paris,” we can fully capture an important content of
that utterance by saying it is the content that Napoleon is buried in Paris, even
though that way of putting it does not attempt to specify my eccentric ways of
thinking of Napoleon and Paris. But the experiential aspect of the content of an
experience just is a kind of mode of presentation, so a notion of the content of
an experience that left out the mode of presentation would be defective.

Note that I am assuming color realism, i.e. that there are facts about the
colors of things and those facts involve things having colors, for example that
fire hydrants are often red and grass is often green. This position contrasts with
error theories that say that nothing really is colored but rather color involves
an erroneous projection of mental properties onto the world (Boghossian &
Velleman, 1989, 1991).

In other work, I have defined qualia as qualities of experience that cannot be
defined in terms of their representational,3 functional4 or cognitive properties.
And I have used the inverted spectrum hypothesis (Block, 1990, 1994, 1999;
Block & Fodor, 1972) in those arguments. The word ‘qualia’ is often used to
indicate a feature of our experience whose existence is disputed. Here the focus
is on the ineffability of experience, and so it is convenient to use the term
‘qualia’ to denote features of experience that have the kind of ineffability just
mentioned.5

2. Two Inverted Spectrum Hypotheses

“Wittgenstein’s Notes for Lectures on “Private Experience” and “Sense
Data”” (Wittgenstein, 1968) were written in English, apparently between 1934
and 1936 (Rhees, 1968). Wittgenstein is notoriously difficult to interpret, even to
the extent that scholars cannot agree whether claims that are clearly formulated
in his writings are being asserted or denied—or neither. I will put forward
an interpretation of Wittgenstein’s view of the inverted spectrum hypothesis
and of the nature of sensory experience, not as a proposal that meets the
standards ofWittgenstein scholarship, but rather as a suggestion in a recognizably
Wittgensteinian framework that is worthy of discussion (and refutation) on its
own merits. When I attribute a view to Wittgenstein, you may wish to understand
that as “Wittgenstein-according-to-one-non-expert”. The seeming endorsement
of the possibility or at least coherence of one kind of spectrum inversion (the



Wittgenstein and Qualia / 75

kind I am calling “innocuous”) begins in this passage6:

The normal use of the expression “he sees [red] where . . .” is this: we take it as
the criterion for meaning the same by ‘red’ as we do, that as a rule he agrees
with us in giving the same names to the colours of objects as we do. If then in a
particular instance he says something is red where we should say that it’s green,
we say he sees it different from us.

Notice how in such a case we would behave. We should look for a cause of his
different judgment, and if we had found one we should certainly be inclined
to say he saw red where we saw green. It is further clear that even before ever
finding such a [[284]] cause we might under circumstances be inclined to say this.
But also that we can’t give a strict rule for. . .

Consider this case: someone says “it’s queer/I can’t understand it/, I see
everything red blue today and vice versa.” We answer “it must look queer!’”
He says it does and, e.g., goes on to say how cold the glowing coal looks
and how warm the clear (blue) sky. I think we should under these or similar
circumst[ances] be incl[ined] to say that he saw red what we saw [blue].7 And
again we should say that we know that he means by the words ‘blue’ and ‘red’
what we do as he has always used them as we do.”

I will be arguing that the kind of inverted spectrum hypothesis that
Wittgenstein endorses (as possible or at least coherent) in this passage commits
him to something he would not agree with, so a defender of Wittgenstein
might respond that after proper consideration, Wittgenstein would not have
endorsed it.8 However, I think what Wittgenstein describes here is obviously
coherent. Further, subsequent technological developments have shown that
something near enough is possible, even technically feasible now. Colors are
easily reversed in digital television. I myself have appeared, inverted in color,
in an interview on a German television station. And it is feasible right now
for virtual reality goggles to make use of such technology in producing that
inversion experience in a subject. With a relatively small investment, such virtual
reality goggles could be produced now. I think most vision scientists would
agree that the same transformations could in principle be accomplished by
circuits embedded between the eye and the brain, although no one knows how
to do this now. (I will describe this science fiction scenario as having “wires
crossed” in the visual system, a terminology that I think derives from Putnam
(1981, p. 80).)

Later in these notes (p. 316 of Rhees, p. 285 of Stern), Wittgenstein confirms
the endorsement and introduces the version of the inverted spectrum hypothesis
that he rejects—what I will call the “dangerous” type. (This is my terminology,
not Wittgenstein’s—I mean dangerous for a Wittgensteinian point of view.)

. . .We said that there were cases in which we should say that the person sees
green what I see red. Now the question suggests itself: if this can be so at all,



76 / Ned Block

why should it [not] be always the case? It seems, if once we have admitted that it
can happen under peculiar circumstances, that it may always happen. But then
it is clear that the very idea of seeing red loses its use if we can never know if the
other does not see something utterly different. So what are we to do: Are we to
say that this can only happen in a limited number of cases? This is a very serious
situation.—We introduced the expression that A sees something else than B and
we mustn’t forget that this had use only under the circumstances under which we
introduced it.9 Consider the prop[osition]: “Of course we never know whether
new circ[umstance]s wouldn’t show that after all he saw what we see.” Remember
that this whole notion need not have been introduced. “But can’t I imagine all
blind men to see as well as I do and only behaving differently; and on the other
hand imagine them really blind? For if I can imagine these possibilities, then the
question, even if never answerable makes sense.” Imagine a man, say W., now
blind, now seeing, and observe what you do? How do these images give sense to
the question? They don’t, and you see that the expression stands and falls with
its usefulness.

The idea that the other person sees something else than I, [[317]] is only
introduced to account for certain expressions: whereas it seems that this idea
can exist without any reference to expressions. “Surely what I have he too can
have.”10

Note the words “We said that there were cases. . .” suggesting that those cases
are coherently describable and perhaps possible. What is the difference between
the innocuous and dangerous cases? In the innocuous case, colors are inverted but
certain properties of them—warm and cool—are not, and this happens suddenly
to someone whose color experience has been normal before. So it is detectable
because of two significant changes: (1) Things the subject knows to be red such
as hot coals and blood look green and things the subject knows to be green such
as grass look red and (2) blood suddenly seems cool colored and grass seems
warm colored. The dangerous scenario is widespread and is not behaviorally
detectable.

There is an immediate problem in figuring out what is supposed to be
happening in the dangerous scenario. The most straightforward way for the
innocuous case to become widespread would be if the odd thing that happened
to the subject of the innocuous inverted spectrum scenario simply happened
repeatedly, the result being many inverted people who saw blood as green and
cool-colored and grass as red and warm-colored and were aware of this fact about
their vision. But that is not what Wittgenstein intends in the dangerous scenario,
since he takes the dangerous scenario to be one that is behaviorally indetectable.
He says about the dangerous scenario that “we can never know if the other does
not see something utterly different.” Perhaps the odd thing that happened to the
subject in the innocuous scenario is supposed to have happened at or before birth
in the dangerous scenario. Then one might suppose that inversion is widespread
but not detectable because the inverted people have not experienced a change
and they have learned to use color words and the word ‘cool’ in conjunction



Wittgenstein and Qualia / 77

with the color experiences they get on seeing, e.g. grass. So one might take the
dangerous scenario to be one in which warm and cool are supposed to be inverted
along with the colors themselves (Block, 1990, footnote 16; Levine, 1991), and
in which the subject has no memories of things having looked differently in the
past.

3. The Inner Arena Model

This paper started life as a comment on a chapter of Paul Horwich’s book in
progress on Wittgenstein (Horwich, in progress). Horwich—like Wittgenstein—
contrasts a form of inverted spectrum involving experiential contents that can
be captured in ordinary language with another form of inverted spectrum which
cannot, and so, in my terms involves qualia. I am grateful to Horwich and his
chapter for inspiring me to try to elaborate the case for qualia from considerations
of inverted and shifted spectra—the subject of this paper.

Horwich, interpreting and elaboratingWittgenstein’s ideas, argues that (what
I would call) the dangerous inverted spectrum hypothesis presupposes a private
arena model according to which experiences take place that are observed directly
by the person whose arena it is, but only indirectly by others. And awareness of
experience is not just a matter of having the experience. On Horwich’s account,
the private arena model motivates a conception of experience as essentially
subjective and ethereal and not constituted by anything objective and concrete.
He contrasts these ideas unfavorably with the claim that the meaning-constituting
use of “I am in pain” should be taken instead to be an expressive use in which
those words are substituted for a natural expression of pain. On this account,
the reference of ‘pain’ is not involved in fixing the meaning of the term. He also
links the private arena model to the idea that there must be determinate answers
to questions about the sensations of others, e.g. whether computers can have
pains. A related view of the “Cartesian Theater” has been advocated by Dennett
(1991).

I will argue that an inner arena model has little to do with the argument for
inverted or shifted spectra.

It is not easy to find contemporary philosophers who have argued for the
possibility of an inverted spectrum and who can also reasonably be said to accept
a private arena model. D. M. Armstrong (1968; Bacon, Campbell, & Reinhardt,
1993, reply toMartin) accepts a perceptual model of introspection and something
that might be called an inverted spectrum, but the issue is complicated by his
eliminativism about experiential qualities. Sydney Shoemaker (1982) has argued
strongly for the possibility of an inverted spectrum but equally strongly against an
observational model of introspection (1994b; 1996b, including footnotes not in
the journal version). As Shoemaker notes, it is not clear that even Locke accepted
an observational model of perception, given that his theory of perception involves
causal signals from external objects affecting sense organs so as to produce ideas



78 / Ned Block

in our minds that represent those external objects. This is a reliable but fallible
process as contrasted with introspection, in which for Locke there is no gap
between appearance and reality.

Shoemaker gives a detailed analysis of what is wrong with various obser-
vational models of introspection. For example, perception involves an organ of
perception but there is no organ of introspection; perception involves experiences
of what is perceived but there are no experiences of experiences in introspection;
there are not different introspective perspectives on the same experiences in
the way that there are different perceptual perspectives on the same perceived
object; the relation between the pain and the introspective belief about it is
more intimate than an observational relation: the pain is more like a part of the
introspective belief than a reliable cause of it; the objects of perception often
exist completely independently of the perception of them and the perceivers
who perceive them, but what is introspected cannot be independent of the
introspection and introspector in this way. Shoemaker emphasizes a version of
the self-intimating nature of experience in relation to introspection which has no
analog in observation. His overall viewpoint provides a serious challenge to the
idea that a dangerous inverted spectrum necessarily involves an observational
model of introspection.

I am another example of someone who argues for an inverted spectrum
but does not accept the observational model of introspection. I agree with the
points just mentioned about what is wrong with the observational model of
introspection, but unlike Shoemaker, I think that one can attend to one’s own
experiences. (And in that respect, my view is more like an observational model
than Shoemaker’s.) Shoemaker’s view is shared by Fred Dretske (1995), Gilbert
Harman (1990), Michael Tye (1995; 2000) and many others who advocate what
G. E. Moore termed the diaphanousness (or sometimes the transparency) of
experience. Harman (1990) puts the point by saying that the more one tries
to attend to one’s experience of the tree, the more one attends to the real tree
instead. Although Moore is sometimes cited as the originator of this point, he
did not actually accept it. I have heard him quoted saying “. . . the moment we
try to fix our attention upon consciousness and to see what, distinctly, it is, it
seems to vanish: it seems as if we had before us a mere emptiness. When we try
to introspect the sensation of blue, all we can see is the blue; the other element
is as if it were diaphanous.” But these words are followed by what I regard as a
more significant truth: “Yet it can be distinguished if we look attentively enough,
and know that there is something to look for.” (See Amy Kind’s treatment in her
2003.)

If we want to appreciate the case for the claim that we can attend to our
own experiences, we would do well to avoid examples like Harman’s in which one
is looking at a tree, trying to attend to one’s experience instead of the tree. An
example I have used (1995): you are engaged in an intense conversation, realizing
suddenly that for some time, you have been hearing street-drilling outside and
have even raised your voice to compensate for it. At the moment of the sudden



Wittgenstein and Qualia / 79

realization, you switch at least some of your attention to the experience of the
sound, and not just to the sound itself. For another type of example, consider
the difference between blurry vision as of something, say a movie, whose lines
may be clear and crisp, as contrasted with clear and crisp vision of a blurry
movie (Block, 1996, 2003). There is an introspectible difference that cannot be
appreciated without attending to the experience as well as to what the experience
is of. What we experience is closely tied to what concepts we bring to bear in
experience and introspective experience is no exception. Of course these examples
are the beginning of an argument, not the end.11

Another way in which I differ from the private arena model as sketched by
Horwich is that I do not take experience to resist objective concrete constitution.
The view of qualia advocated here is, at least according to me, fully compatible
with physicalism. I also doubt that the private arena model motivates the claim
that experience resists objective concrete constitution. I take Dennett’s (1991)
Cartesian materialist picture (a picture Dennett argues against) to be one that
combines a private arena view with materialism.

Still another way in which I differ from the private arena model at least in
Horwich’s version is that I do not think that questions about other minds need
have determinate answers. An example that I have given elsewhere (2002) is that
belief in qualia does not require a determinate fact of the matter as to whether
fish have qualia.

Horwich takes the difference between the innocuous and dangerous inversion
hypotheses to be the difference between a case that can be described in public
language with expressions like “smelling a rose”, “painful” and the like, and
a case that requires a private way of describing experience not expressible in
public language. In my terms, the difference is qualia. He takes the rules of use
for mentalistic expressions to dictate that your experience when you look at red
things in normal circumstances is just like mine. There can be no further question
of what it is like for you to see red as compared with me. To ask what looking red
is like is like asking how long five feet is. Here, I disagree, as will become clear in
the sections below on shifted spectra and inverted spectra. Horwich argues that
the dangerous form of the inverted spectrum hypothesis derives from the internal
arena model, especially the conflation of first person sensation reports—which
he construes as expressions of sensation (on the model of natural expressions
of pain)—with observations. Certainly I and other contemporary advocates of
inverted spectra do not accept key tenets of the internal arena model and the
observational view of introspection. Of course, what one explicitly advocates and
what one presupposes are two different things. In introducing a materialistic
version of the “Cartesian Theater”, Dennett (1991, p. 107) allows that “Perhaps
no one today explicitly endorses” such an idea. Indeed, “Many theorists would
insist that they have explicitly rejected such an obviously bad idea”. But, he
insists, the picture he has sketched nonetheless plays a behind-the-scenes role.
And perhaps Horwich would suppose something of this sort too. But Horwich
and Dennett give no reasons for thinking that actual contemporary arguments for



80 / Ned Block

the possibility of dangerous inverted spectra really do presuppose the mistaken
models.

In my view, Wittgensteinians who emphasize the observational model
of qualia are barking up the wrong tree. The view of qualia that leads to
the epistemic problems that exercise Wittgensteinians is that that there are
determinate facts of qualia independently of our cognitive access to those facts.
A Wittgensteinian might call it the “inner light” model.12

4. Intrasubjective vs. Intersubjective

Let us now return to the issue of what the difference is between the innocuous
and dangerous inverted spectrum scenarios. Philosophers have made much of the
difference between an intrasubjective spectrum inversion—in which a person at
one time is said to be inverted with respect to the same person at another time—
and an intersubjective spectrum inversion in which one person is said to be
inverted with respect to another. (See (Putnam, 1981; Shoemaker, 1982, 1996a).)
The key dialectical difference can be explained as follows. Suppose we have a
pair of identical twins at birth, one of whom has had the wires crossed in his
visual system. The twins are raised normally and acquire color terminology in
the normal way. On the point of view that I favor, we may suppose that it is
possible that the way red things (which they agree are red) look to one twin is
the same as the way green things (which they agree are green) look to the other.
Now a vulnerability in this line of thought stems from the following objection
(Block, 1990, 1994; Harman, 1990).

Notice that it is not possible that the brain state that one twin has when
he sees things that both twins call “red” is exactly the same as the brain state
that the other twin has when he sees things that they both call “green”. At
least, the total brain states can’t be the same, since the first causes the subject
to say “It’s red”, and to classify what he is seeing as the same color as blood
and fire hydrants, whereas the second causes the other twin to say “It’s green”,
and to classify what he is seeing with grass and Granny Smith apples. Here is an
example. Suppose that the color-relevant brain state that one twin (the one who
had no operation) has when he sees red things and that the other has when he
sees green things is R-oscillations in area V4, whereas the color-relevant brain
reaction in the first twin to green and to the second twin to red is G-oscillations
in area V4. If the proponent of the possibility of an inverted spectrum says
this is evidence for inversion, the objector can say that phenomenal properties
should not be thought to be based in brain states that are quite so “localized”
as R-oscillations in V4 or G-oscillations in V4, given that R oscillations lead to
different reports in the different twins. Rather color experience should be seen as
based in more holistic brain states that include the brain bases of reporting and
classification behavior. (I am assuming agreement on an extremely weak form of
physicalism.13) Thus the objector whom I am thinking of will want to say that



Wittgenstein and Qualia / 81

one twin’s holistic brain state that includes R-oscillations and the other twin’s
holistic brain state that includes G-oscillations are just alternative realizations of
the same experiential state: that experiential state has a disjunctive realization.
So the fact that red things cause R-oscillations in one twin but G-oscillations in
the other doesn’t show that their experiences are inverted.

Of course the local G to R transition is a transition in the way things
look. However, that experiential difference has only been demonstrated intra-
subjectively, keeping constant the larger brain state that specifies the roles of
R and G-oscillations in classifying things. The R/G difference in each subject
is a color experience difference, but this gives us no knowledge of cross-person
comparisons. The objector can insist on typing brain states for inter-personal
comparisons holistically. And most friends of the inverted spectrum are in a
poor position to insist on typing experiential states locally rather than holistically,
given that they normally emphasize the “explanatory gap”, the fact that there
is nothing known about the brain that can adequately explain the facts of
experience. So the friend of the inverted spectrum is in no position to insist
on local physiological individuation of qualia. At this stage, the debate seems a
standoff, and that is where the intrasubjective inverted spectrum comes into the
picture.14

The intrasubjective inverted spectrum scenario can be seen as a way for
the defender of the inverted spectrum to evade this objection, for if the change
happens in the life of an individual person, we have introspective and behavioral
evidence of an inversion and so can avoid the issue of whether brain states should
be thought of in a localistic or holistic manner (Block, 1990, 1994; Shoemaker,
1982).

I agree with this superiority of the intrasubjective inverted spectrum scenario,
and will be pursing it in detail later. But for now, my point is that the intra vs.
inter difference is not directly involved in the difference between the innocuous
and the dangerous inverted spectrum. What is involved, as I will be arguing, is
whether the inverted pair are both normal, since that is what is relevant to the
expressibility of phenomenal character in public language.15

5. Normality

So what is the difference between the “innocuous” inverted spectrum case,
the one Wittgenstein regards as at least coherent, and the “dangerous” case,
the one that he rejects? One difference is that the innocuous case occurs
suddenly and “under peculiar circumstances:” the subject agrees that fire and
the sky now “look queer”; whereas in the dangerous case “it may always
happen”, even not under peculiar circumstances. Another difference is that the
innocuous case is behaviorally different because the subject says, e.g. coal looks
cool colored, whereas what Wittgenstein is suggesting in the dangerous case is
an inverted person who is not behaviorally different. I would guess that the



82 / Ned Block

behavioral indetectability of the dangerous inversion was extremely important
to Wittgenstein’s rejection of it. (This comes out in the second quote from
Wittgenstein together with the passage in footnote 10.)

However, there is another difference that does not depend on behavioral
indetectability, and this difference is the one I am going to focus on here. I will
argue that the dangerous scenario can be used to argue for qualia even if it is
behaviorally detectable. Qualia, you will recall, are features of experience that are
not expressible in ordinary language, including terms for properties of objects.
One cannot express what red things look like colorwise in normal circumstances
using color terms as in “looks red”, since things that look the way red things look
to me (in normal circumstances) may look to you the way green things look to me.
So among qualia are ways things can look red. Something might look red to two
people in different ways. And I think a crucial difference between the innocuous
and dangerous cases that is relevant to qualia, is whether normal people (or one
normal person at different times) in normal circumstances can be said to be color
inverted or shifted with respect to one another. In the innocuous case, the color
inverted person is abnormal. But if “one section of mankind has one sensation of
red and another section another,” (Wittgenstein, 1958, Section 272, p. 95) then it
would seem that normal people can have inverted color experience with respect
to one another, and that is enough to produce a “very serious situation.”16 Here
is why.

It is incoherent to suppose that there are normal people in normal viewing
circumstances for whom red things look green. To see this, suppose you are
one of those putatively normal people for whom red things always look green.
Suppose that you and I agree that there is a difference between us in ways that
things look color-wise, and that the difference can be described by the locution
“Things we agree are red look to you the way things we agree are green look to
me.” I say to you that whereas red things look red to me, red things look green
to you. You can object to the idea that red things look green to you. You can
reply

Who says that red things look green to me? Why are you the one for whom red
things look red? I can with equal justification say that red things look red to me
and green to you!

If we are both normal, you have as good a case as I do. Since we are both
normal, the right response is that neither you nor I have a superior claim to be
the one for whom red things look red and green things look green. The situation
is relevantly symmetrical. What we should say instead is that the way red things
look to me is the same as the way green things look to you, and in allowing that
there are ways things look that cannot be expressed in terms of “looking red”
or “looking green” or any phrase of the form “looking F” where F is a color
name, we step into the realm of qualia. (Given what I mean by ‘qualia’, this is
definitional.)



Wittgenstein and Qualia / 83

Using the familiar “what is like” terminology (Farrell, 1950; Nagel, 1974),
the point is that if we acknowledge the existence of an innocuous inverted
spectrum scenario, we can say that green is what it is like for the abnormal
person to see red, whereas for the normal person, red is what it is like to see red.
So the innocuous scenario does not require us to suppose that there are color
experiences that cannot be expressed in terms of properties of things. However,
if we allow the existence of a dangerous scenario, in which normal perceivers
are inverted with respect to one another, we cannot say of either of them that
green is what it is like to see red. If we acknowledge the existence of an inverted
spectrum in this sense, we have to agree that no color name expresses what it is
like for either one of the inverted people to see red. (Whether the existence of a
dangerous scenario is required for qualia or whether its possibility will do will
be taken up later.)

I am not saying that what it is like for them to see red cannot be referred
to in English. For example, we can refer to it by saying “What it is like for that
person to see red”. What we cannot find is a color name ‘F’, such that what it is
like for one of these people to see red can be expressed in the form “looking F”,
and in that sense we can say that the experiential property is an ineffable quale.

I am also not denying that Wittgenstein was concerned with the behavioral
indistinguishability of the persons in the dangerous inverted spectrum case. If
there could be an inverted but behaviorally indistinguishable pair of people,
then it is hard to see how the difference between them could be relevant to any
everyday uses of terms. My point is rather that an inverted pair both members of
which are normal is problematic for Wittgenstein even if they are not behaviorally
indistinguishable.

Sydney Shoemaker (Shoemaker, 1982) distinguishes between intentional and
qualitative similarity. If something looks red to you and me, then our experiences
are thereby intentionally similar, but if your spectrum is inverted relative to mine,
our experiences are thereby qualitatively dissimilar. (Although I have not yet
argued for the possibility of the dangerous kind of inversion, I will assume it
here to get the conceptual groundwork in place.) If something looks red both to
you and to me, our experiences thereby have a shared intentional content, but
if our spectra are inverted with respect to one another, and if you are looking
at a red thing and I am looking at a green thing, our experiences have a shared
qualitative content. Looking red is an intentional content of color experience,
not a qualitative content. For both members of the inverted pair, red things look
red and green things look green. Color language in application both to the outer
and the inner is keyed to intentional contents of experience (Block, 1990). States
that have qualitative contents are just qualia, and it is the existence of qualitative
contents that pose the challenge to expressibility in language.

It may seem from what I have said so far that the issue of qualia is the issue of
whether the phenomenal character of experience goes beyond its representational
content, that is, the issue of representationalism, or representationism as I call
it (Block, 1990, 2003). But that is not the case, as can be seen by a brief



84 / Ned Block

consideration of a view held by Shoemaker (1994a; 1994b) and Michael Thau
(2002). In Shoemaker’s version, the view is that when one looks at a ripe tomato,
one’s experience represents the tomato as having two distinct kinds of color-
relevant properties, as being red and as having a certain “phenomenal property”.
If your spectrum is inverted with respect to mine, and we are looking at different
items with complementary colors (e.g. you a red thing, me a green thing), our
experiences represent those items as having the same phenomenal property and
as having different colors. These phenomenal properties are definable in terms of
qualia. As far as what I have said so far is concerned, one might think of them
as qualia projected onto objects—but Shoemaker does not think of them that
way, since he holds they are causally efficacious, indeed defined in terms of their
production of qualia. So Shoemaker is a kind of representationist, and that allows
one to see that one can be both a representationist and a believer in qualia. On
Shoemaker’s view, color experience has two kinds of representational contents.
One of them is what I have been and will be calling intentional contents, namely
color-representing representational contents, contents that represent something
as, e.g. red. But the other kind of representational content (the kind that
represents phenomenal properties) is not expressible in public language. The
issue of qualia is not the issue of whether the mental properties of experience can
be fully captured in terms of what is represented by experience, since it may be
that what is represented by experience cannot always be fully captured in public
language.

We could call the principle that normal perceivers in normal circumstances
see red things as red, and thus that public language attributions of color
experience express intentional contents of experience rather than qualitative
contents the Principle of Normality.17

Gottlob Frege (Frege, 1884/1953) held a somewhat similar view (quoted in
Byrne, 2006):

The word ‘white’ ordinarily makes us think of a certain sensation, which is, of
course, entirely subjective; but even in ordinary everyday speech, it often bears,
I think, an objective sense. When we call snow white, we mean to refer to an
objective quality which we recognize, in ordinary daylight, by a certain sensation.
If the snow is being seen in a coloured light, we take that into account in our
judgement and say, for instance, ‘It appears red at present, but it is white.’ Even a
colour-blind man can speak of red and green, in spite of the fact that he does not
distinguish between these colors in his sensations; he recognizes the distinction
by the fact that others make it, or perhaps by making a physical experiment.
Often, therefore, a colour word does not signify our subjective sensation, which
we cannot know to agree with anyone else’s (for obviously calling things by the
same name does not guarantee as much), but rather an objective quality. (§26)

And, although my interpretation is not standard, one can see Wittgenstein’s
beetle in the box passage as compatible with a similar view.18 The idea would
be that the thing in the box—a quale—is irrelevant to the language game, which



Wittgenstein and Qualia / 85

involves only what I am calling intentional contents (that is, color-representing
contents). But qualia can exist and be important for some purposes even if the
language game that Wittgenstein has in mind has no need of them.

In a comment on a version of this paper at Hilary Putnam’s 80th birthday
conference, Pierre Jacob noted, correctly I think, that belief contents do not
mirror intentional contents of perception in the sense in which I am using the
term. If our putative inverted twins both see a ripe tomato and have intentional
color contents representing it as red (and the same shade of red) but have
different qualitative contents, we would be reluctant to say that they have exactly
the same color-relevant beliefs about the tomato. For the twins have different
qualitative beliefs about the color of the tomato, where a qualitative belief is a
belief that includes a color quale (or, alternatively, a belief that represents the
tomato as having a certain phenomenal property in Shoemaker’s sense of the
term). Another way of seeing Jacob’s point would be to think of the intentional
contents of perception as individuated both in terms of reference and mode of
presentation, where qualia are taken as modes of presentation of those referential
contents as suggested by Tyler Burge (2003). Nothing hangs on how we use the
term ‘intentional content’ (and I will continue to use the term to mean color-
representing purely referential content). The important point is that if normal
people can be inverted with respect to one another, there is an aspect of color
experience that cannot be captured in ordinary language in terms of properties
of objects.

The Normality Principle links public language color terminology to inten-
tional rather than qualitative contents of experience. I now turn to the argument
for that link, and then to arguments for shifted and inverted spectra.

6. Color Terms Express Intentional not Qualitative Contents

Assuming without argument at this point that the dangerous scenario is
possible, what exactly is the argument that color terminology (‘red’, ‘green’,
etc.) is keyed to color-representing intentional contents rather than qualitative
contents?

In daily life, we do not distinguish between intentional and qualitative
content, just as we do not normally distinguish between weight and mass or
between rest mass and relativistic mass. Shouldn’t we suppose that there is some
sort of indeterminacy, as with ‘mass’, where ordinary uses of the term ‘mass’
partially denote both, as argued plausibly by Hartry Field (Field, 1973)? In
(Block, 1990), I argued that if spectrum inversion is known to be rife, it would
make sense to think of our tacit semantic policy as one of using color terms as
applied to experience to denote intentional contents of experience, since when
we say of someone that the fire hydrant looks red to him, we often know what
the intentional content is, but not what the qualitative content is. So how can
we be understood as attributing a qualitative content? However, we do not know



86 / Ned Block

whether spectrum inversion is actually rife (cf. (Byrne, 2006), §3.8). Is there an
argument from our lack of knowledge whether or not inversion is rife to the
same conclusion?

Yes, a similar argument applies. When we say of someone that the fire
hydrant looks red to him, we can know what the intentional content is—say if
we know that conditions are normal and the perceiver’s visual system is normal
(excluding crossed wires)—but not, without examining the subject’s brain, what
the qualitative content is. If phrases like “looking red” were intended to apply
to qualitative contents, we would have a vulnerability to widespread error that
we tacitly assume that we do not have. For example, we assume that we all stop
at stop-lights in part because they look red to us, and no one would take that
assumption to be overturned by finding out that everyone has a slightly different
spectrum. Of course if everyone has the same spectrum except for a few defectives
who see red things as green, we do think that stoplights do not look red to the
defectives. My point rather is that if spectra vary from normal person to normal
person, we would not take that to impugn our judgment that stoplights look red.
And the fact that we do not know whether this is true (and that there is some
evidence that it is true) shows that a reasonable semantic view would hold that
looking red is not a qualitative content.

I have some agreement with Frege when he says “Often, therefore, a colour
word does not signify our subjective sensation, which we cannot know to agree
with anyone else’s.” I would take the “cannot know” to mean in practice rather
than in principle, since I think perceptual neuroscience is making great strides
in that direction. The Fregean point is very easily available to language users. I
became aware of it as a child. And my seven-year old daughter commented on
first hearing the inverted spectrum hypothesis that it explained why some people
didn’t have purple as their favorite color.19

7. Shifted Spectra

The paper now shifts gears to two arguments for the possibility of spectra
that are inverted or shifted. I have not said what sense of ‘possible’ is at issue.
The relevant notion, I think, is metaphysical possibility, but there is no need to
go into the matter because I will be arguing for a stronger thesis. In the case of
shifted spectra, my conclusion will be that there is reason to think they are actual
and in the case of inverted spectra I will be arguing for nomological possibility
with an eye to actuality.

Thus far, I have argued that we do not take our attributions of looking
red to be shown false or otherwise problematic by the discovery of qualia, thus
indicating that our tacit semantic policy is to key “looking red” to intentional
contents rather than qualitative contents. But I have not yet argued that there
really are states with qualitative contents, that is I have not argued for qualia. In
this section I argue that individual variation in the phenomenology of color vision



Wittgenstein and Qualia / 87

at least sometimes goes beyond variation in the use of public color terminology.
I argue that this fact can be used to argue for the existence of qualia and further
that its appreciation by us provides further support for the claim of the last
section that attribution of looking red is keyed to intentional contents rather
than qualia. (See (Block, 1990, 1999) and Putnam’s example of the Ixxzians
(Putnam, 1999, p. 162–166)).

The first premise in the argument is the fact that there is enormous
variation in the physiology of color vision in the normal population which leads
to enormous variation in color phenomenology. For example, there are large
differences among normal perceivers in peak sensitivity of cones in the retina.
For example, there is a 51.5%/48.5% split in the population of two types of long
wave cones that differ by 5–7 nm, roughly 24% of the difference between the
peak sensitivities of long and middle wave cones. ((Neitz & Neitz, 1998)) This
characteristic is sex-linked. The distribution just mentioned is for men. Women
have smaller numbers in the two extreme categories and a much larger number
in between. As a result, the match on a common test “most frequently made by
female subjects occurs where no male matches” ((Neitz & Jacobs, 1986), p. 625).
(See Block (1999) for further explanation.)

Further, variation in peak sensitivities of cones is just one kind of color vision
variation. In addition, the shape of the sensitivity curves vary. These differences
are due to differences in macular pigmentation, which vary with “both age and
degree of skin pigmentation” (Neitz & Jacobs, 1986, p. 624). Hence races that
differ in skin pigmentation will differ in macular pigmentation. There is also
considerable variation in amount of light absorption by pre-retinal structures.
And this factor also varies with age.

I emphasize gender, race and age to stifle the reaction that one group should
be regarded as normal and the others as defective.

Premise 1 said that that there is enormous variation in the physiology of
color vision in the normal population which leads to enormous variation in
color phenomenology. Premise 2 says that the variation in the phenomenology
of color vision must vary even among those whose use of color terms is the same.
For the borders for our application of color terminology to objects must to some
extent be constrained by needs of communicating and cooperating with other
people.

Imagine, contrary to fact, that we were all given rigorous training in
the application of accepted color terminology to the point where variation in
application of color terms among us was minor. Things we almost all categorize
as ‘borderline between red and purple’ will still look quite different to us, just as,
in the inverted spectrum scenario, a fire hydrant that the members of the inverted
pair both categorize as ‘red’ looks different them. My premise 2 is that to some
extent, that is the way things are. That is, color terminology is to some extent
subject to social and linguistic constraint.

How do we know that? Normal people see colors as having the same
similarity relations. In the Farnsworth-Munsell 100 hue test, subjects are asked



88 / Ned Block

to arrange 100 chips in a circle with one chip fixed as the starting chip. Normal
subjects make nearly the same arrangement (Hilbert & Kalderon, 2000). One of
the things social and linguistic influence does is to impose a set of categories on
that similarity space. Before the introduction of oranges into England, the color
we call ‘orange’ was considered a shade of ‘red’. (The OED’s first listed use of
‘orange’ as the name of a color is from 1512.) Cultural and linguistic influences
no doubt affect the borders of our color categorizations. And of course culture
also affects our shade categories. I am sure that those who were school age in the
USA after 1949 will agree pretty much on the forty shades of Crayolas introduced
then and in use (with more added and a few subtracted in 1958, 1972, 1990, 1993
and 1998) since then, such as turquoise blue—despite variation in the way those
colors look to us.

The upshot is that there are likely to be many normal cases of same use
of public color terminology, different phenomenology—and that is what I am
calling shifted spectra. If red things look slightly different to you than to me,
there is no saying that either of us perceives more veridically than the other, since
we are both normal perceivers, and so there is no way of capturing the difference
in external terms. (A number of replies are canvassed in my (2003).) So there are
qualia.

An objection to this line of reasoning: Red things may look slightly different
to you than me, but that difference may be describable in ordinary language. For
example, a red thing may look yellower to you than to me. Here is an argument
to support the objector. Many people report slightly different color vision in
their two eyes, e.g. things look yellower through one eye than the other. (Hilary
Putnam mentioned that he sees colors differently in different eyes at the Putnam
at 80 conference mentioned in footnote 1.) Suppose one of Putnam’s two eyes
could be copied and inserted in an eyeless person, Oscar, while the other was
inserted in another eyeless person, Elmer. If Putnam sees yellower through the
eye that Oscar got, we have reason to think that Oscar sees yellower than Elmer.
So here is a difference that is effable.

Suppose Oscar and Elmer are looking at a wall painted an orange that is
perfectly balanced between yellow and red. One possibility is that Elmer says it
is pure orange but Oscar says the wall is slightly on the yellowish side of orange.
However, another possibility—and one that my argument of this section militates
towards as a reality and not just a possibility—is that both Oscar and Elmer say
and think that the wall is pure orange. One would expect that if both had been
trained on Crayolas! And there is no reason to suppose that they way it looks to
them deviates systematically from their thought and talk. The situation is then
that they both see it as pure orange but one sees it as yellower than the other.
The best way to understand how that could be is to acknowledge that there are
ways of seeing orange and that those ways can differ from person to person.
The objection that we are considering notes that we can compare these ways in
ordinary language. And here is the reply: yes we can compare them in ordinary
language, but that does not show that we can fully capture these contents in



Wittgenstein and Qualia / 89

ordinary language. Oscar and Elmer differ in their color vision, but they may
have equal claim to see orange as orange.

Points similar to the ones mentioned here were made in Block (2003) where
I was arguing (as against representationism) that the phenomenal character of
experience outruns its representational content. I claimed that two phenomenally
slightly different experiences could nonetheless represent the same color (in
different phenomenal ways), even the same minimal shade. Much of that paper
was concerned with the issue of whether the phenomenally different experiences
that represented the same color could nonetheless be said to have different
representational contents. However, the point argued for in this paper is weaker as
can be seen by noting that even if the slightly phenomenally different experiences
are also different in representational content, they are still qualia if those
representational contents cannot be expressed in public language. That is, even
if my argument against representationism fails, the argument for qualia in the
present sense might succeed.

The picture that emerges is that there is a structured space of color qualia
that determines the structure of real world colors themselves. Normal people
have pretty much the same similarity relations in their structured spaces (as
shown by the experiment with the 100 hue test mentioned earlier) but differ in
correspondences between that space and colors in the world, probably because of
variation in the retina and in pre-retinal structures. Relations among color qualia
are determined by the shared structured qualia space, and so those relations can
be expressed in terms of the colors themselves (e.g. “yellower”) but there is
no objective “location” of color qualia in real world color space because of
the differences among people in correspondence between the space and actual
colors.20

The point about qualia being comparable but not expressible in ordinary
language applies also to inverted spectra. In the Oscar/Elmer shifted spectrum
case, Oscar and Elmer differ by a rotation of the color circle—slightly towards
yellow in Oscar. In the usual ROYGBIV depiction of the color circle, that
corresponds to a clockwise rotation. In the inverted spectrum cases to be
discussed below, one twin differs from the other by a 180◦ rotation, which is
the same in both directions.

These points will be the basis of my discussion below in Section 12 of the
“Frege-Schlick” view.

To summarize: the Putnam two eye example suggests that qualia can at least
sometimes be compared across people. One person’s color experience is yellower
than another’s or one person’s color experience is “complementary” to another’s.
Does this show that the contents are expressible in public language after all and
so are not qualia? No: qualia can be compared in public language without being
fully capturable in public language. Even if your experience is yellower than
mine, it can nonetheless be the case that there is no color term F such that your
experience of red things is describable as “looks F”.



90 / Ned Block

8. Behavioral Indistinguishability

My arguments for qualia on the basis of the shifted and inverted spectrum
do not presuppose that the shifted or inverted perceivers are behaviorally
indistinguishable from one another. For example, the 51.5%/48.5% split in the
population that I mentioned could, for all I know, determine the extent to which
warm colors advance or are exciting compared to cool colors. If half of mankind
is inverted with respect to the other half, the inversion shows the existence of
qualia even if the inverted spectrum is behaviorally detectable—unless one half
is thereby seen to be abnormal or unless the behavioral difference undermines
the claim of inversion. To see this, note that the little dialectic I rehearsed earlier
about who has authority over the word ‘red’ would apply to the two normal
groups as well as to two normal individuals. Neither group could pretend to be
“the” group for which red things look red. If it is alleged that for members of one
group, red things look green, the other group can complain that the situation
is relevantly symmetrical, whether or not there are differences in which colors
advance and which recede.

Virtually all arguments that inverted spectra are impossible that I have
read or heard appeals to one or another sort of asymmetry in color space.21

(I am talking about arguments that spectrum inversion is impossible not that
it makes no sense or is otherwise problematic as alleged in the arguments by
Robert Stalnaker that will be considered later.) For example, Bernard Harrison
(Harrison, 1973) argues that there are more colors between red and green going
one way around the color circle (via blue) than going the other way (via yellow).
A far more significant asymmetry is that the most saturated colors differ in
their lightness levels from color to color. If you decrease the lightness of a
sample of yellow you get a different color (brown), but the same is not true
for green or blue. The most saturated reds are darker than for other primary
colors. Further, desaturated red is pink but desaturated green is green, so hue
is not symmetrical with regard to saturation.22 These are not just differences
in categorization, but also differences in similarity. A light and dark blue look
much more similar to one another than do light yellow and dark yellow, i.e.
brown (Hilbert & Kalderon, 2000). Just how significant such asymmetries are is
hotly debated. Stephen Palmer (1999) discusses a far larger number of ways in
which the color space can be mapped onto itself than had appeared in the prior
literature, some of which may avoid such problems although Justin Broackes
(2007) argues otherwise. In addition, as Shoemaker notes, it is not clear why
minor asymmetries ought to be significant given that we could imagine a slight
variant of human color vision in which those asymmetries are absent but color
experience is much the same as ours. But this argument is unsound according to
Daniel Dennett (1991). Dennett notes that red is advancing, warm and exciting,
whereas green is receding, cool and calming, claiming that such asymmetries in
function are what make the colors look different from one another. So, according
to Dennett, Shoemaker’s imagined race for whom these “minor” asymmetries



Wittgenstein and Qualia / 91

are ironed out, could not have color experience much like ours. Others (Block,
1994) argue that these differences in reaction may not be intrinsic to color
experience, their widespread presence in different cultures being explained by
environmental regularities that are not necessary at least to the basics of color
experience.23

But this whole set of controversies can be sidestepped—at least if the
existence of qualia is the issue. For as I have noted, the argument for qualia that
I am talking about depends not whether the inversion or shift is behaviorally
indetectable but whether the groups that are inverted or shifted with respect
to others are normal. If it turns out—and as I argued, the evidence points in
that direction—that a person’s spectrum is very often shifted with respect to his
neighbor, I don’t think anyone would conclude that this shows that defective
color vision is widespread.

In the rest of this paper, I will discuss an argument that an inverted spectrum
is possible. I will focus on an intrasubjective inverted spectrum because of the
advantage I mentioned earlier. I will be considering an inversion in which the
inverted pair are roughly functionally equivalent but not necessarily exactly
functionally equivalent. For example, perhaps one member of the pair experiences
red things as exciting and advancing whereas the other experiences them as
calming and receding. (Earlier versions are in (Block, 1990, 1994).)

I say that an argument that an inverted spectrum is possible is an argument
for qualia. “But doesn’t a possible inverted spectrum show at most that qualia
are possible rather than actual?” The argument from the possibility of inverted
spectra to qualia is this. Suppose an inverted spectrum is possible but non-
actual. If we manage to create an inverted spectrum (a procedure that may work
is described below), it would be wrong to suppose that we have created qualia
where they did not already exist. The fundamental nature of experience does not
change because we create a situation that exhibits a fundamental feature of it! So
the possibility of an inverted spectrum is sufficient for the existence of qualia.

9. Inverted Spectra

I have made the case for actual shifted spectra. Now I will argue that
inverted spectra are possible and perhaps actual. Let us start with a question-
begging description of the scenario. The point of so doing is to highlight the
contrast with another description which is not, I will argue, question-begging. See
Figure 1.

We start at Stage 1 with you at your 18th birthday, at which time you are
a normal perceiver. You call red things ‘red’ and red things look red to you. In
need of funds, you agree to undergo an experimental color inversion in which
a chip is inserted in your optic nerve which changes signals from red things
into the signals that would have been produced by green things, and so on for
other colors.24 I have been calling this “crossing the wires in the visual system”.



92 / Ned Block

Figure 1. Question–begging Inverted spectrum scenario. The captions express the way things look
to the subject at each stage in terms of the existence of ways of looking, R and G. R is the way
the red tomato looks to the subject at Stage 1. G is the way the red tomato looks to the subject
at Stages 2, 3 and 4.

If we were relaxed about what counted as a visual “input”, we could imagine
instead virtual reality goggles that do this trick without any surgery (as mentioned
earlier).

The operation is a success: at Stage 2, you are disposed to call red things
‘green’ and they look green to you, and so on: you see colored things as having
the complementaries of their actual colors. You become famous to the point
where you feel that the paparazzi are ruining your life. You change your name
and your appearance with cosmetic surgery and move to another state, trying to
blend in. At first, you have to fight your tendency to call red things ‘green’ and
your tendency to stop at green lights, to suppose that red tomatoes are unripe
and so forth, but after some years have passed, you naturally and spontaneously
react to colors in the normal way. You unthinkingly call stop-lights ‘red’ and stop
at them. Even though you unthinkingly call stop-lights ‘red’, at first you think of
them as looking green, but your desire to put the operation and its unpleasant
sequelae into the past leads you to work to think of stop-lights as looking red.



Wittgenstein and Qualia / 93

You want to be normal and find it tiresome to be reminded of the operation you
had at age 18. By the time you are 30, you spontaneously think of blood as not
only being red but also looking red.

How do we know that the colors have not reinverted so that the way things
look is the same at Stage 1? According to the story—which I am claiming is
a genuine possibility—you remember very clearly what things used to look like
before the operation, and if asked by close relations in private, you say that
everything used to look the complementary color of the way it looks now. At
Stage 3, you are 50, and you haven’t thought about your operation in many years.
Someone who recognizes you despite the cosmetic surgery says to you “Aren’t
you the person who underwent the experimental spectrum inversion?” You say
“Oh yes, I haven’t thought about that in many years. But I do clearly recall the
look of the ripe tomatoes at my 18th birthday party. They looked to me then the
way grass looks to me now, colorwise.” If asked to paint a picture of the way
things look to you today, you paint the grass green and the sky blue. If asked to
paint a picture of the way things looked to you before the operation thirty-two
years earlier, you paint the grass red and the sky yellow (Taylor, 1966). Another
10 years pass, during which time no one asks you about the operation and during
which time you don’t think of the days before 18 or any of the times someone
has questioned you about the inversion. At age 60, you develop amnesia for the
period up to age 50 (cf. (Putnam, 1981)). Now, and this is Stage 4, you have no
memories for the period before your operation, nor do you have any memories
for episodes of remembering that period. However, according to the story, the
way red things look to you at Stage 4 is the way green things looked to you at
Stage 1. If this is to be an argument against functionalism, Stage 1 and Stage 4
have to be functionally equivalent.25 However, if the purpose of the argument is
to demonstrate qualia—and that is my main purpose here—the differences could
be more substantial. For example, perhaps at Stage 4, red is no more exciting
than green.

The way in which this argument is question-begging is summarized in
Figure 1. The subject at Stage 3 says “I do recall the look of the ripe tomatoes at
my 18th birthday party. They looked to me then the way grass looks to me now,
colorwise.” But what are these ways and why should we countenance them? And
if these suspicious ways are coming in at Stage 3, presumably they must have
been involved at the outset, in the argument at Stage 1. The relevant bones of
the argument diagrammed in Figure 1 amounts to this:

Stage 1: There is a way red things look to the subject, R.
Stage 2: The way red things look to the subject is now G.
Stage 3: The way red things look to the subject remains G.
Stage 4: The way red things look to the subject remains G, even though the

function of G is similar to (but not necessarily exactly the same
as) the function of R in Stage 1. The subject at Stage 4 is a normal
perceiver.



94 / Ned Block

The question-begging aspect is the postulation and naming of the ways
things look, even at Stage 1.

However, ways need not be brought in at the outset. It may seem that
in saying that red things look red, I have sneaked in something illicit maybe
something amounting to ways, for we would not ordinarily say that red things
look red. Isn’t that “language going on holiday”? Actually, Wittgenstein is
committed to red things looking red at Stage 1 in my view as I will now argue.

Consider Stage 2: red things look green. If our subject, the person who has
undergone something “peculiar” is asked how he sees red things, he says he sees
them as green. (In Wittgenstein’s version, he says “I see everything red blue today
and vice versa.”) But now if asked how the way he sees things now contrasts
with the way he saw things yesterday, it is perfectly natural for him to say. “I
see everything red as green today, but yesterday I saw everything red as red.”
So we are justified in saying that at Stage 1, he sees red things as red. Imagine
the subject talking to his doctor where it is better to err on the side of over-
explicitness. The doctor is wondering whether there might have been something
wrong with the patient even at Stage 1. To be absolutely clear, the patient says
that red things look green today but yesterday red things looked red. And that
justifies the descriptions given below in Figure 2 of Stage 1 and Stage 2.

And once we have gone this far, it is difficult to see how to avoid the
descriptions I have given of Stage 3 and 4. If red things look green at Stage 2,
then they still look green at Stages 3 and 4. Here is a summary of the essential
aspects of the argument.

Stage 1: Red things look red.
Stage 2: Red things look green.
Stage 3: Red things still look green.
Stage 4: Red things still look green even though the subject calls them ‘red’

and is in other respects a normal perceiver.

However, there is a problem with the descriptions in Figure 2. At Stage 4,
the subject is, I claim, a normal perceiver again. If so, it is false to say that red
things look green to him—that would violate the Principle of Normality which
says that normal perceivers in normal conditions perceive veridically. And that
leads to a further variant of the argument, one that moves back part way to the
version given in Figure 1.

In this, the final variant, ways are introduced at Stage 4. The idea is that at
Stage 4, the subject, who is now a normal perceiver, perceives veridically. White
(1986) has suggested that the functionalist should say that once the amnesia
hits, the subject’s experience instantaneously reinverts. Am I saying something
similar? Do red things suddenly look red as soon as the subject gets amnesia?
No. For an abnormal subject as in Stages 2 and 3, color terms have to be used
relative to normality. At Stage 2, the obvious relativity is to Stage 1, just a day
earlier, when the subject was normal. But at Stage 3, there is some indeterminacy



Wittgenstein and Qualia / 95

Figure 2. Version of the inverted spectrum scenario that is not question-begging but which
violates the Principle of Normality. The same events as described in Figure 1, but described
without explicit mention of the ways things look or of ‘R’ and ‘G’. The focus is on the colors
that things look to have.

about how color terms should be used—relative to the normal Stages 1 or 4.
Since red things look red at Stages 1 and 4 and since there has been an inversion
in between, the most plausible way to accommodate the inversion is in terms
of ways. Perhaps ways could be introduced at Stage 3 as well, but in any case
Stages 1 and 2 can be described without recourse to ways, so the argument cannot
be described as begging the question. The ways at Stage 4 are a conclusion, not a
premise. That, in brief, is the argument. In the next section I will elaborate some
of the premises.



96 / Ned Block

Figure 3. Version of the inverted spectrum scenario in which ways are introduced at Stage 4.

10. Premises in the Inversion Argument for Qualia

I have given a way of conceiving of spectrum inversion, but conceiving
spectrum inversion does not show that spectrum inversion is possible. It would
be agreed by all—even those like Chalmers (2002) who argue that conceivability
of the right sort entails possibility—that it is not a straightforward matter to
move from conceivability to possibility. (Gendler & Hawthorne, 2002; Hill, 1991;
Stoljar, 2006). My view is that the most significant reasons for thinking that
spectrum inversion is not possible are all reasons that involve the asymmetrical
nature of the color solid and thus allege that inversion would have to be



Wittgenstein and Qualia / 97

behaviorally detectable. But since I am not appealing to a behavioral indetectable
inversion, these arguments do not apply here.

David Cole (1990) appeals to experiments using goggles that invert the retinal
image, claiming that these subjects adapt in the sense of experiencing a reinversion
of experience. A recent study (Linden, Kallenbach, Heinecke, Singer, & Goebel,
1999) suggests previous reports greatly overplayed the extent to which behavioral
adaptation to the goggles involve a reinversion of experience. Cole mentions other
experiments which I think are irrelevant to the spectrum inversion case but I do
not have the space here to discuss. (See also Hurley, 1998.)26

I said the subject at Stage 4 is normal. But he has undergone an operation
in which the wires in his visual system were “crossed”. And what could be more
abnormal than that? But wait! “Crossed” is a metaphor. The visual system of
the subject at Stage 4 is different from that subject at Stage 1 as a result of an
operation, but why suppose it is Stage 4 that is abnormal rather than Stage 1?
An operation can—and often does if successful—restore normality. A hernia is
stitched up, a tumor removed, a heart repaired—all cases in which the “after” is
more normal than the “before”. If we were to discover that all the rest of us were
born with the physiological formation of the visual system that obtains in Stage
4 and that it is Stage 1 that is “peculiar”, we would regard Stage 1 as “crossed”.
If we were to find out that our subject at Stage 1 was born with an unusual
visual system, we would naturally take the view that the operation “uncrossed”
the wires in his visual system, making his visual system normal again. This way
of talking makes it look as if the “crossed” visual system must be abnormal, but
that is a mistake.

For what would we say if half the population has a visual system like Stage
1 and half like Stage 4? Then we should say that both are normal, that there are
two different varieties of normal visual systems. And in that case, both Stage 1
and Stage 4 are normal. The operation has succeeded in changing one normal
visual system into another normal visual system. If Stage 1 and 4 are both
normal—and possible—there are qualia, since neither our subject at Stage 1 nor
our subject at Stage 4 can claim that he uniquely, sees red things as red and green
things as green.

I think the fact that “crossed” visual systems are normal can be shown
by example. The example I have in mind was first advanced by Martine Nida-
Rümelin for a somewhat different purpose, as I will now explain. (See (Byrne,
2006; Byrne & Hilbert, 2003; Nida-Rümelin, 1996).) The three kinds of cones
in the retina feed to three “opponent-process channels”, as discovered in the
19th Century by Hering, on the basis of purely behavioral data. The red/green
channel operates as follows: If the activation of the R cones is greater than that
of the G cones, the red/green channel is excited and the subject sees red (if the
other channels are in approximate equilibrium). If the activation of the G cones
is greater than the R cones, the red/green channel is inhibited and the subject
sees green if the other channels are in approximate equilibrium. The three types
of cones send both excitatory and inhibitory signals to three kinds of cells in



98 / Ned Block

the structure that is the basis of the next stage of processing beyond the retina
(known as the lateral geniculate nucleus). These cells are called “color opponent
cells” for obvious reasons.

One form of color blindness occurs when the subject has a genetic defect that
substitutes the photo-pigment in the G cones, chlorolabe, for the photo-pigment
in the R cones, erythrolabe. With the photo-pigments in the two kinds of cones
the same—both chlorolabe—the subject is red/green color blind. It can also
happen that another genetic defect substitutes the photo-pigment in the R cones
for the photo-pigment in the G cones. In this case, they are both erythrolabe.
(See Byrne and Hilbert, 2003.) Again, with the photo-pigments in the two cones
the same, the subject is red/green color blind. If the two genetic defects occur at
once, the subject has the usual G photo-pigment in the R cones and the usual R
photo-pigment in the G cones, resulting in normal discrimination. This case—
known as pseudo-normal color vision—can be predicted to occur in 14 of 10,000
males, but as far as I know, no such case has ever been noticed. Apparently, the
color vision of these people is sufficiently normal so that they do not consult an
eye doctor about abnormal color vision.

If the eyes and optic nerves from a pseudo-normal were switched with yours
(assuming you are not pseudo-normal), the effect would be—as far as we know—
that the red/green opponent cells would be activated in the opposite manner from
those in your retina. Red things would look green and green things would look
red. The point is that the pseudo-normal is a living example of crossed wires
in the visual system.27 What we do not know is whether the development and
history of visual experiences of the pseudo-normal yields something different
from the imagined transplant. That is, what is controversial is how hard-wired
the connection is between the cones and the color-opponent cells and between
the color-opponent cells and the rest of the visual system in the brain. If those
connections are hard-wired, then we can expect that in pseudo-normals, the
red/green channel would be inhibited in input situations in which it is excited
in normals and excited when it is inhibited in normals. Then these subjects are
red/green inverted with respect to normals such as you and me.

(Byrne & Hilbert, 2003, p. 19) give 3 arguments against Nida Rümelin.
“First, even if pseudo-normal vision actually occurs, its frequency will be very
low . . .; thus the possibility of pseudo-normal vision does not show that spectrum
inversion might be widespread. Second, there is in any case no reason to suppose
that pseudo-normal genes would preserve normal visual pathways: the opponent
channels might be switched as well, in which case pseudo-normal subjects would
not be red-green spectrally inverted. Third, there is evidence that for the M- and
L-cones the development of the retinal circuitry for the red-green opponent
channel is insensitive to which pigment the cone contains. In other words,
pseudo-normal subjects would just be normal subjects.” The first point is
irrelevant to the issue considered here, where normality rather than frequency is
what is in question. On the second point: I think it would be rational to accept
even odds on the experiential inversion of the pseudo-normal subjects and that



Wittgenstein and Qualia / 99

is enough for the claim that inversion may be actual and at any rate is possible so
far as we know. The third point seems to me to count in the opposite direction
of what Byrne and Hilbert say. If the development of the visual system did react
differently depending on whether the pigment was erythrolabe or chlorolabe,
then that would count against the possibility that the cones are hard-wired into
the opponent-process channels. The force of the pseudo-normal configuration
depends on pigment-insensitive connections between cones and channels.

Nida-Rümelin and others (Block, 1999; Nida-Rümelin, 1996, 1999a, 1999b;
Ross, 1999) have used this case in an argument for the possibility of intersub-
jective inversion. I agree with that argument, but I am using pseudo-normals
for a less controversial purpose: as an example of crossed wires in the visual
system, and crossed wires that are normal. It is a case of crossed wires because if
a pseudo-normal’s eyes were switched with yours, you (and the pseudo-normal)
would experience color inversion as in Wittgenstein’s original case of the person
who wakes up one morning finding that red things look green and conversely.
Pseudo-normals who live with their eyes from birth (and before) might not be
inverted with respect to the majority, but if their eyes are switched with yours,
the effect will be to stimulate the R-G channel in the opposite from normal way.

So pseudo-normals have crossed wires. But are they normal? How can that
be when pseudo-normal color vision is the combination of two genetic defects.
Chlorolabe and erythrolabe must be more or less equally suited to the two kinds
of cones as attested by the fact that none of the more than 4 million pseudo-
normals in the world have come to light—as far as I have been able to determine.
A pseudo-normal person can equally say that normals are the result of two
genetic defects: the cases are symmetrical. Pseudo-normals are less frequent, but
I hope no one will take that to be decisive. If pseudo-normals were the more
numerous, no doubt they would be in control of the terminology.

The example of pseudo-normals shows I think that intersubjective inversion
may be actual and is for all we know possible. But that is not my main point
in introducing it. Recall that we are discussing intrasubjective inversion and the
issue at hand is whether the visual apparatus of Stage 4 should be regarded as
abnormal solely on the ground of difference from Stage 1. I offer the case of
pseudo-normals as normal visual systems that differ in a way that could be like
the difference that I am hypothesizing exists between Stages 1 and 4, namely
“crossed”.

The argument for qualia is supposed to be mainly based on the possibility of
an intrasubjective inverted spectrum. I did detour through the pseudo-normals
as an example of intersubjective inversion but also as an example of a kind of
“crossed” visual system that is normal. And the argument can make do with
the latter. I talked about others who have visual systems like that in Stage 1
and others who have visual systems like that in Stage 4, but without appealing
to intersubjective inverted spectrum. The point is that there is no reason why
both visual systems cannot be normal and so no reason why our intra-subjective
inversion subject has to be abnormal at either the beginning or end of the process.



100 / Ned Block

Sydney Shoemaker and Daniel Taylor (Shoemaker, 1975; Shoemaker, 1982,
1996a; Taylor, 1966) have argued from the possibility of intrasubjective inversion
to the possibility of intersubjective inversion. They argue that if Fred undergoes
intrasubjective spectrum inversion, then the color experience of others must
be radically different from Fred’s either before his inversion or after it (or
both). My argument is different since my argument does not appeal essentially
to intersubjective inversion. An opponent of the Shoemaker-Taylor intra/inter
argument28 might acknowledge that crossed wires in the visual system makes
for color inversion in the intra-subjective case—as is shown by the testimony of
subjects who undergo the procedure—while resisting the claim as applied to the
intersubjective case. The idea would be that congenital differences of that sort
between different groups of normal perceivers are just alternative realizations
of the same phenomenology of experience. I think that this refusal to accept
intersubjective inversion can be defeated on its own terms, but that is not my
main purpose here.

Objection: “Although the result of the operation is a normal visual system,
our subject at Stage 4 is abnormal because of the operation which produced it.”
Not so, because an operation need not produce anything abnormal. An operation
can correct an abnormal defect, yielding normality.

“But the process leading to Stage 4 includes both the operation and the
adaptation, and doesn’t that make Stage 4 abnormal?” No: adaptation to an
operation is often an essential part of the normalizing process. For example,
there is a congenital “heart inversion” condition called transposition of the great
arteries in which the outputs from the ventricles are reversed. In the normal
heart, the pulmonary artery rises from the right ventricle, taking deoxygenated
“blue” blood to the lungs (which is then returned to the left side of the heart via
pulmonary veins), whereas the aorta rises from the left ventricle pumping “red”
blood to oxygenate the body. In the heart inversion condition, the aorta rises from
the right ventricle, pumping “blue” blood to the body, whereas the pulmonary
artery arises from the left ventricle, circulating “red” blood unnecessarily to the
lungs. The effect is that the left ventricle does very little work, quickly losing
muscle mass as a result. If an arterial switch operation is done too late (more
than about a month after birth), the left ventricle will fail and the child will
die, but if the operation is done early enough, the left ventricle can build up
mass after the operation via the process of making new heart cells, an ability
that the heart loses. The point is that the operation does not immediately restore
normality. First, there is a period of adaptation in which the left ventricle regains
the lost cells. But the need for a period of adaptation after the arterial switch
operation does not make the child’s heart forever abnormal.29

11. Memory

Wittgenstein raised the question of how we could distinguish inversion
from misremembering, raising the issue of “whether the things stored up may



Wittgenstein and Qualia / 101

not constantly change their nature” (Wittgenstein, 1993, p. 204). And Dennett
(1988; 1991) has emphasized the issue of the unreliability of memory in arguing
against inversion scenarios. Figure 4 shows a schematized Stage 1 at the top
(that is the topmost of the 4 schematic depictions). Seeing a ripe tomato causes
the subject to experience red which causes him to say “Red!”, indicating a
normally functioning experience as of red. I symbolize a normal experience
of red with ‘R’ as in Figure 1. I am assuming, contrary to the intervening
argument, and purely for mnemonic purposes, that the inverted subject can be
seen as abnormal with an experience symbolized with ‘G’. (Less mnemonic
symbols that don’t make this mistake would be ‘X’ and ‘Y’.) The second
portion shows the subject at Stage 2 where seeing the red tomato causes an
experience as of green, which causes the subject to say “Green!”, indicating the
complementary function. The bottom half of the diagram indicates two different
versions of the situation at Stages 3 and 4. According to the possibility that I
have been emphasizing (“phenomenal realism”), at Stages 3 and 4, red things
look green. The subject says “Red!” because there has been a terminological
inversion that cancels out the color perception inversion. But memory skeptics
such as Dennett wonder how we can rule out the case schematized in the last
line in which the compensating inversion occurs earlier than I imagined and the
subject misreports his experience, remembering falsely what red used to look
like.

Dennett’s claim is that the two possibilities represented in the two scenarios
at the bottom half of Figure 3 cannot be distinguished. However, he gives
no reason to doubt that they can be distinguished empirically, as indicated in
Figure 5.

Figure 5 presents an implementation of the difference indicated in the bottom
two scenarios of Figure 4. In the top case in Figure 5, the possibility that I have
been emphasizing is elaborated. The subject at Stage 3 sees a ripe tomato and
contrasts the way it looks colorwise with the way ripe tomatoes used to look.
The machinery of this comparison involves a comparator device which compares
the neural implementation of the experience with the neural implementation of
the memory of previous tomato experiences. Of course, this story is physicalistic,
but no more so I think than the Tuesday New York Times (see footnote 13). A
Wittgensteinian who wishes to deny this level of physicalism would have to adopt
a revisionary theoretical perspective, something that aWittgensteinian should not
do. The skeptical idea is that the memory is itself inverted, as is the experience,
so when the subject compares them, the subject says the current experience is not
what he remembers. The report is the same but the internal reality is not. Dennett
wonders how these two hypotheses could possibly be distinguished. Since they
cannot be distinguished, he thinks there is no real difference. (He is explicit
about advocating “first person verificationism”.) My response is that there is no
reason to doubt that the normal methods of science could distinguish them. For
example, perhaps it could be shown that the memory representation does not
change in the relevant period. Dennett might object that one can tell whether



102 / Ned Block

Figure 4. The phenomenal realist contrasted with the memory skeptic. See text.

the memory representation in the brain changes only if one can distinguish the
memory representation from the physical basis of the quale itself, whereas his
point is that these cannot be distinguished. But since memory and experience
are to some extent distinct, they must to some extent be distinct at the level of
the brain. The point of the detail illustrated in Figure 5 is that once one makes
the hypothesis concrete, the claim that the normal methods of science cannot
possibly resolve such issues begins to look like mere skepticism.

The point is further illustrated by a different form of the skeptical hypothesis
illustrated at the bottom of Figure 6. In this form of the skeptical hypothesis,
the memory representation is actually the same as the perceptual representation,
but because of an inversion involved in the comparison process, the subject
thinks otherwise. Again, why should anyone suppose that the normal methods
of science could not find the difference between this case, the one at the bottom of
Figure 5, and the phenomenal realist hypothesis at the top of both figures?

Some functionalists hold that the identity of experience and relations among
experiences are constitutively tied to memory of those experiences. For example,
Sydney Shoemaker (Shoemaker, 1996a, p. 147) says “The functional role of
a quale must surely include the ways in which the instantiation at one time
combines with instantiations of the same or different qualia at later times to
produce certain effects. . .This means that the total realization of a quale will
have to include the memory mechanisms by which qualia have the appropriate
“downstream effects”. Functionalists often argue that in crucial cases it is
arbitrary whether one says that experiences are qualitatively the same or that



Wittgenstein and Qualia / 103

Figure 5. The bottom two hypotheses from Figure 3 elaborated.

there is a memory illusion. Shoemaker and Robert Stalnaker (Shoemaker, 1996a;
Stalnaker, 1999, 2006) have had an interesting debate in part about this issue,
but more generally about whether the kind of combination of functionalism and
physicalism endorsed by Shoemaker precludes an inverted spectrum. I am not
a functionalist (Block, 1978, 1980; Block & Fodor, 1972). In any case, I don’t
see that functionalism can be assumed in an argument against the possibility
of an inverted spectrum, which is notoriously usable in an argument against
functionalism. Further, since my argument does not require members of the
inverted pair to be behaviorally or functionally indistinguishable, it is not clear
that the functionalist argument will work against my point.

12. The Frege-Schlick View

One interesting response to inverted spectrum arguments for qualia involves
the doctrine that Shoemaker (1982; 1984; 1996a; 2006) calls the “Frege-Schlick”
view, and the best defense of that view to date is Robert Stalnaker’s (1999; 2006).
Shoemaker’s version of the Frege-Schlick view is that relations of qualitative
similarity and difference only apply intrasubjectively and not intersubjectively.
On this view, there can be a genuine issue about whether my experience of red is
qualitatively the same or different from my experience of green now or last week
but not whether my experience of red is qualitatively the same or different from
your experience of red. On that version of the Frege-Schlick view, qualitative
relations do not supervene on any conglomeration of naturalistic properties,



104 / Ned Block

and not surprisingly, Shoemaker’s 1982, 1996 and 2006 discussions of the issue
reject it.30 Stalnaker’s version of the Frege-Schlick view is in a way much less
radical because what his version rejects “is only a notion of qualia that is both
independent of representational content, and also comparable across persons.”
(2006, p. 391) He is happy to acknowledge interpersonal qualitative comparisons
so long as they can be cashed out in representational/functional terms. In a way
though, Stalnaker’s version is more radical than Shoemaker’s since he rejects
intra-personal comparisons of experience over time as well as inter-personal
comparisons of experience—if the qualities of the experience cannot be cashed
out representationally/functionally.

I said that skepticism about interpersonal comparisons of experience is
incompatible with a generally physicalistic world view. To see this, suppose there
are two people who are physical (and functional) duplicates looking at the same
object, say the moon, from the same visual angle. Suppose also that they are
identical in history of stimulation. Despite identity in everything about them and
their environment, current and historical, that could reasonably be supposed to
be relevant, the form of skepticism under discussion insists that there is still no
issue of fact as to whether their experiences of the moon are the same or totally
different.

Hilary Putnam argued in response to a presentation of this paper at the
Putnam at 80 conference (see footnote 1) that a single sufficient condition—
perfect physical identity—does not establish a matter of fact for any other case
or give us any reason to think there is any kind of a physically determined
metric of similarity. Right, but there is no reason to doubt that normal
procedures could not discover the determinants of many comparisons between
people.

As I mentioned earlier, Putnam himself has slightly different color vision in
his two eyes. Consider Oscar and Elmer mentioned earlier, one of whom has a
copy of Putnam’s left eye, the other of whom has a copy of Putnam’s right eye.
If Putnam sees things grayer through the left eye (as he does), we have every
reason to think that Oscar will see things grayer than Elmer, especially if we can
pinpoint whatever it is about the retina or pre-retinal structures in Putnam’s two
eyes that very likely are responsible for the difference. Further, examination of
your eyes and mine could provide evidence that other things equal, your color
vision is grayer than mine. One can imagine many cases in which one would be
reasonably confident about a comparison between people, independently of any
representational or functional theory or any other philosophical theory of the
nature of experience. In short, we have mundane reason to believe certain inter-
personal comparisons of experience. Wholesale rejection of interpersonal com-
parisons is incompatible with scientifically informed common sense. Stalnaker’s
view conjoined with this fact entails that some sort of representationism is true.
The possibility of an inverted spectrum is incompatible with leading versions
of representationism, so not surprisingly, Stalnaker argues against the inverted
spectrum.



Wittgenstein and Qualia / 105

Figure 6. The top figure is the same as in Figure 5. The bottom figure illustrates a different
sort of memory skeptic.

Stalnaker’s argument is based in large part on two analogies, of which I will
discuss only one. It depends on a relational theory of space. Consider an analog
of an inverted spectrum for space. We can make sense of the idea that this table
is moved 3 feet in the direction defined by the arrow from here towards say the
Andromeda Nebula. And that this chair is also moved in that direction. But
if everything moved in that direction, would the result be a universe in which
everything has moved 3 feet from where those things are now? Of course not.
What it is for something to move 3 feet in that direction is for it to move 3
feet relative to everything else. If object A moves 3 feet to the left, then when
object B moves 3 feet to the left the “everything else” is slightly different from
what it was in the case of A’s move, so in the end the relations that define
position are the same as when we started. The suggestion is that in the intra-
subjective inverted spectrum scenario, there is similarly no fact of change except
relative to other color experiences. If they all shift, then there is no change at
all.

If one does not believe that the qualitative character of experience is entirely
determined by relations to other qualitative characters of other experiences, then
the analogy will look wrong. The analogy is certainly at variance with some
aspects of common sense. For example, I think common sense leaves it open
whether a color blind person can have exactly the same experience of say a
black and white drawing as non-color blind people have, despite the fact that the
color-blind person’s “color space” is different. But the most important point is
that this is not an issue to be settled a priori or by common sense. The nature
of experience—and I would say the same of the nature of space—is to be settled
by the best scientific picture.



106 / Ned Block

Shoemaker (2006) makes another point about the analogy. On the relational
theory of space that Shoemaker attributes to Stalnaker, diachronic distance is
dependent on synchronic distance. Something at t2 has moved from where it was
at t1 if its synchronic distances from other things are systematically different in
the appropriate ways at t2 from its synchronic distances from those things at
t1. But there is no comparable dependence of diachronic qualitative relations
on synchronic ones. Shoemaker’s example (p. 22) is that if two colored lights
are flashed, one after the other, I can compare the experiences of them without
comparing either of them with the kinesthetic experiences, smells, sounds and
aches and pains that accompanied either one of them. Some functionalists might
suppose that there is a dependence on synchronic relations even if I don’t have
to be aware of it in order to judge the relation between the two lights, but if that
is the objection to Shoemaker’s point, then once again the defense of Stalnaker’s
analogy appeals to the conclusion.

Stalnaker (2006) replies that the relational view of space that he defends
is not the one that Shoemaker attributes to him. On Stalnaker’s version of
the relational view of space, diachronic distance is not dependent on synchronic
distance. Both kinds of distances are a matter of relations in a coordinate system.
Actual objects are used to fix the reference of the coordinate system but not to
define it in any stronger sense. On Stalnaker’s version of the relational theory,
distances are real, but locations are conventional. So, once everything has moved
3 feet in the same direction, all relative distances are the same as at the beginning,
and there is no overall motion with respect to any location.

Here is a different analogy. Students of Galileo founded the Accademia del
Cimento in Florence in the 17th Century. Members of the Accademia pioneered
the study of heat phenomena, making the first thermometers, an example of
which is found in Figure 7. These thermometers were marked with gradations
visible in the picture, but the gradations were not carefully spaced and there was
no attempt made to relate the gradations at one end of the scale to those of the
other end or of one thermometer with those of another. At the beginning of their
investigations, the experimenters did not know whether an intra-thermometer
difference of 5 degrees at one end was in any objective way equivalent to an
intra-thermometer difference of 5 degrees at the other end or whether there
was any inter-thermometer correspondence between 5 degrees as measured by
one thermometer and 5 degrees as measured by another. A big advance was
made when thermometers and their scales were calibrated to specific freezing
and boiling points such as the freezing and boiling point of water. Now there
was a meaning to inter-thermometer comparisons, but it was still unknown
whether an analog of Stalnaker’s theory of space applied. Perhaps there were
facts about the temperature difference between the boiling and freezing point
of water, but no “locational” facts about either point. That is, perhaps the only
facts of temperature were distances between certain temperature points such
as freezing and boiling points for various substances. But as it happened, that
turned out false when it was discovered that temperature is mean molecular



Wittgenstein and Qualia / 107

Figure 7.

kinetic energy and hence that there is an absolute zero point at which kinetic
energy is zero. That is a “locational” fact that would correspond in the spatial
arena to the discovery of a kind of “absolute” space.

Which is the better analogy for phenomenal experience, Stalnaker’s space
analogy or the temperature analogy? I don’t see how anyone could think this
is an a priori question. There are two accounts, a functionalist account that
roughly fits Stalnaker’s view and a physicalist account that roughly fits my view
(Block, forthcoming). I think that there is some preliminary evidence that favors
the physicalist view—some of which I have mentioned here—but my main point
is that there is no way to be sure now. Different philosophers come to different
conclusions based on their philosophical perspectives and their own sense of
their own experience.

13. Conclusion

I started with a shifted spectrum argument for qualia and then moved to
an inverted spectrum argument. I provided evidence for the claim that a shifted



108 / Ned Block

spectrum is actual. My argument with respect to the inverted spectrum was more
modest: there is reason to think it is possible and perhaps actual. A key feature
of my argument was that the versions of the shifted and inverted spectrum
needed for qualia do not require behavioral indistinguishability of the shifted
and inverted pairs—a point that disarms many objections. The upshot is that
Wittgenstein is right to say “This is a very serious situation.”

Notes

1. An ancestor of this paper was written for a conference on the work of Paul
Horwich in Pécs, Hungary, May 15–16, 2006 and another draft was prepared
for a conference on the work of Hilary Putnam in Dublin, Ireland, March 14–
16, 2007. I am grateful to Horwich and Putnam for their responses and to
Pierre Jacob, the commentator on my paper at the Putnam conference for his
comments and to the audiences there, at the University of Oslo in November,
2006, the University of California at Santa Cruz in April, 2007 and at the Ecole
Normale Supérieur in May, 2007. I am also grateful to Paul Horwich, John
Morrison and Stephen White for comments on an earlier draft.

2. Alex Byrne (Byrne, 2006) and Tim Crane (Crane, 2000) discuss uses of the term
‘qualia’, and the term’s history. According to Crane, C.S. Peirce used ‘qualia’ in
something like its modern sense, and Byrne holds that C.I. Lewis introduced the
term into contemporary philosophy.

3. Representationism is the view that the phenomenal character of an experience
supervenes on its “referential” representational content. The reason for the
“referential” is to exclude unreduced phenomenal characters as modes of pre-
sentation. (The contents assumed by representationists are not object-involving.)
In favor: (Byrne, 2001; Clark, 2000; Crane, 2001; Dretske, 1995; Harman, 1990;
Lycan, 1996; Thau, 2002; Tye, 1995). Opposed: (Block, 2003; Burge, 2003; Nickel,
forthcoming). Harder to classify: (Carruthers, 2000; Chalmers, 2004; Davies,
1997; Kriegel, 2002; Levine, 2003; Pautz, 2005; Shoemaker, 1994a).

4. Functionalism (Armstrong, 1968; Lewis, 1970; Putnam, 1967) says that pain (for
example) can be characterized in terms of its causal relations to sensory inputs,
behavioral outputs and to other mental states.

5. Useful discussions of the inverted spectrum that won’t be discussed other than
in this note are to be found in (Chalmers, 1996; Cohen, 2001; Cole, 1990; Kirk,
1982; Lycan, 1973, 1996; Rey, 1992, 1998; Tye, 1995, 2000).

6. Wittgenstein’s notes have been re-edited by David G. Stern (Wittgenstein, 1993)
who says that Rush Rhees left out about half the material (p. 200–201). Since
Stern gives the reader much more information about the text, I am using his
version. This passage appears on p. 230–231 of Stern’s version and p. 284 of
Rhees’s version. The square brackets indicate changes in the text by Stern.
The bracketed ‘red’ in the first line is accompanied by a footnote saying that
the text reads ‘green’ but that this was probably a slip. The 3 dots at the
end of the second paragraph are in the text and do not indicate anything
left out by me. The ‘[[284]]’ indicates a page number in Wittgenstein’s notes
themselves.



Wittgenstein and Qualia / 109

7. Stern says “The text reads ‘green,’ but this is because Wittgenstein had changed
an earlier use of ‘green’ to ‘blue’ but failed to make the change here” (p. 231).

8. In his introductory notes Rhees (Rhees, 1968, p. 274) notes “All that is printed
here is a collection of rough notes or memoranda which Wittgenstein made for
his own use. He would never have published them—he would not even have had
them typed—without revising and rearranging them. Certainly he would have
revised the language.”

9. Recall that the first passage quoted above seemed to involve a shift from the
example of red/green to red/blue inversion. I will treat the first passage as if it
concerned red and green.

10. This material is preceded by the following passage:

[[316]] Privacy of sense data. I must bore you by a repetition of what I said last
time. We said that one reason for introducing the idea of the sense datum was
that people, as we say, sometimes see different things, colours, e.g., looking at
the same object. Cases in which we say “he sees dark red whereas I see light
red.” We then are inclined to talk about an object other than the physical object
which the person sees who is said to see the phys[ical] obj[ect]. It is further clear
that we only gather from the other person’s behaviour (e.g. what he tells us) what
that obj[ect] looks like, and so it lies near to say that he has this object before his
mind’s eye and that we don’t see it. Though we can also say that we might have
it before our mind[‘s] eye. The ‘sense datum’ here—the way the physical object
appears to him. In other cases no phys[ical] object enters.

Now I must draw your attention to one particular difficulty about the use of the
‘sense datum.’“ The next sentence is the first one quoted in the text to which
this is a footnote. Note, incidentally, that qualia in the sense in which I am using
the term are not supposed to be ‘objects’ of the sort that sense datum theorists
talked about and that Wittgenstein seems to have in mind.

11. Michael Tye (2002) has responded to me on this point by an account of the
difference as one between an experience that ascribes indeterminacy and one
that indeterminately ascribes. This distinction certainly makes sense for verbal
representations, but bringing it in to solve this problem begs the question by
assuming that phenomenal representations are like verbal representations in
allowing for this kind of distinction. This issue has been discussed in varying
forms in (Block, 1983; Dennett, 1968; Peacocke, 1993; Tye, 1995).

12. On my view, there are two such epistemic problems. One is the “Hard Problem”
(Chalmers, 1996): we don’t understand why the neural basis of a given experience
is the neural basis of that experience rather than another or none. The 2nd

problem is the “harder” problem, a version of the problem of other minds. On a
naturalistic picture of consciousness, there is no problem about the consciousness
of other humans, but when we ask about robots that don’t overlap with us in
what we take to be the physical basis of our conscious states, there is a problem
of how to think about the question of whether they have conscious states (Block,
2002).

13. More specifically, I am assuming that the phenomenal character of experience
supervenes on physical states of the body and, in a concession that makes the
view I am assuming a very weak form of physicalism, the physical environment
surrounding the body and even the past physical states of that environment. Of



110 / Ned Block

course some will balk at even such a weak form of physicalism, but it would be
very interesting if it turned out to be incompatible with a Wittgensteinian point
of view that supposedly prescinds from “theorizing”, given that this minimal
physicalism is deeply engrained in the day-to-day practice (and not just the
theology) of the psychology and neuroscience of perception and in my view in
common sense ways of thinking about perception. (See (Nida-Rümelin, 1999a).)
I don’t think an approach to the mind that stresses “leaving everything as it is”
can lightly require giving up such practices.

14. It should also be said that although some kinds of visual experience are localized
in the brain, notably experience as of a face or as of motion, the same cannot
be said for color. Color appears to be represented at a number of occipital sites,
mainly in V4 and V8.

15. Note that it is clear from the first passage that I quoted that for the kind
of inverted spectrum that Wittgenstein is willing to accept, he accepts both
intrasubjective and intersubjective versions of the innocuous scenario. The
individual he describes sees everything differently today than yesterday—that’s
the intrasubjective version. And he also endorses the intersubjective version
in saying “I think we should under these or similar circumstances be inclined
to say that he saw red what we saw blue.” So it does not appear to be the
intrasubjective/intersubjective difference that is at issue as between the innocuous
and dangerous scenarios.

16. I have emphasized the importance of normality and expressibility in ordinary
language in arguments for qualia in “Sexism, Racism, Ageism and the Nature
of Consciousness” (Block, 1999) in which it is argued that males and females,
although equally normal, see colors that they classify as red slightly differently.
Likewise for old/young and races that differ in pigmentation. (Versions of
these arguments transformed for the somewhat different purposes of this paper
will be briefly summarized in the section below on shifted spectra.) And, as
mentioned earlier, Horwich (forthcoming) also argues that the difference between
an innocuous inversion and a dangerous one is expressibility in natural language
by normal perceivers.

17. In Block (1990) I inadvisedly called violations of the Principle of Normality the
fallacy of intentionalizing qualia.

18. “Suppose everyone had a box with something in it: we call it a ‘beetle’. No
one can look into anyone else’s box, and everyone says he knows what a beetle
is only by looking at his beetle.—Here it would be quite possible for everyone
to have something different in his box. One might even imagine such a thing
constantly changing.—But suppose the word ‘beetle’ had a use in these people’s
language?—If so it would not be used as the name of a thing. The thing in the
box has no place in the language game at all; not even as a something: for the
box might even be empty. No, one can ‘divide through’ by the thing in the box;
it cancels out, whatever it is”. (Wittgenstein, 1958, §293).

19. The Fregean view has some affinities with that of Paul Churchland (1984, p. 40.)
Churchland concedes the conceivability of an inverted spectrum, allowing that
different perceivers might have qualitatively different experiences which all have
the functional role characteristic of the experience of red. “Such intrinsic qualia
merely serve as salient features that permit the quick introspective identification
of sensations, as black-on-orange stripes serve as a salient feature for the quick



Wittgenstein and Qualia / 111

visual identification of tigers. But specific qualia are not essential to the type-
identity of mental states, any more than black-orange stripes are essential to
the type-identity of tigers.” (See also (Churchland & Churchland, 1981; Clark,
1985).) What I don’t understand about Churchland’s view is how he can maintain
functionalism despite allowing that qualia escape the functionalist net. In the end,
I suspect that his view is really a mixed functionalist/physicalist view similar to
that of (Shoemaker, 1982): functionalism supplies conditions of similarity and
difference of qualia, but physicalism supplies the natures of specific qualia.

20. One complication that I have not mentioned is that the structure of qualia space
contains four privileged planes that correspond to the “unique” colors, e.g. reds
that are not at all yellowish or bluish. See Pautz (2005).

21. One argument against inverted spectra that is not based on an appeal to
asymmetries is given in (Byrne & Hilbert, 1997). However, that argument is
directed towards the conjunction of the possibility of an inverted spectrum
together with the thesis that there is a failure of match between the phenomenal
character of a sensation and its intentional content. It is not an argument that
purports to show that inverted spectra are impossible.

22. See (Broackes, 2007; Byrne, 2006; Churchland, 2002; Harden, 1997; Hilbert &
Kalderon, 2000) for more details. A slightly more accurate description of the
point about red and green is that desaturated near-red is pink but a desaturated
near green is near-green rather than green.

23. One point on the side of an indetectable inverted spectrum is that the inde-
tectability can be relative to culture and environment. That is, what is required
for an indetectable inverted spectrum is that there is an environment—including
cultural environment—in which there are two individuals (or stages of a single
individual) for whom there is no possibility of detecting an inversion. If those two
subjects are indetectably inverted with respect to one another, then they cannot
express the difference in natural language, even if in a different environment and
culture they would have been detectably inverted. For example, consider a people
who live underground in circumstances of little light, never seeing the sky and
in which there are few stable colors—other than black and white. We would also
have to imagine that the culture has a prohibition against seeing the unclothed
human body, one’s own or that of others. The point is that the environment can
be restricted in ways that restrict the application of color asymmetries that would
show up in less restricted circumstances.

24. I speak as if there is a single kind of inversion but actually there are many
different types of “inversion” in the sense of different ways to systematically
map the color solid onto itself without disturbing relations among points in the
solid. See (Palmer, 1999).

25. The spectrum inversion argument against functionalism that I have given in
other places is a straightforward extensional argument. The functional state
that functionalists must associate with an experience can occur without the
experience, and conversely. Of course, it is always open to the functionalist to
complicate the functional role so as to avoid the counterexamples. But so doing
will in effect bring in physicalist ideas in an ad hoc manner, and so the resulting
view will be an ad hoc combination of functionalism and physicalism. This issue
is discussed in more detail in (Block, forthcoming). Patricia and Paul Churchland
(1981) argue that although spectrum inversion is clearly possible, nonetheless



112 / Ned Block

functionalism wins. Their reason is that a functionalist natural kind will be more
natural than a qualia centered natural kind, the latter being unnatural from the
point of view of neuroscience. However, they do not take on the issue of whether
the ad hoc changes I just mentioned will push the functionalist kind below the
qualia-centered kind in naturalness.

26. One example: Subjects do adapt—experientially—to goggles that are colored
with one color on one side and another on the other side. But in that case, there
is a line in the middle of the visual field where the colors meet and that is the
kind of defect that the visual system is built to adapt to.

27. Let me remind the reader that I am assuming a weak form of physicalism in which
phenomenal character is supervenient on the physical body and its surrounding
current and past environment. See footnote 13.

28. Called the “intra-inner” argument in (Shoemaker, 1996a).
29. I am grateful to Dr. Peter Lang, Department of Pediatric Cardiology at

Children’s Hospital Boston, for filling me in on this issue. The description in
the text concerns “dextro” or “complete” transposition of the great arteries.
See the Wikipedia entry at http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dextro-transposition_
of_the_great_arteries.

30. Shoemaker’s 1984 discussion takes it much more seriously.

References

Armstrong, D. M. (1968). A Materialist Theory of the Mind: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Bacon, J., Campbell, K., & Reinhardt, L. (1993). Ontology, Causality and Mind: Essays in

Honour of D. M. Armstrong. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Block, N. (1978). Troubles with functionalism. Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science,

9, 261–325.
Block, N. (1980). Are Absent Qualia Impossible? Philosophical Review, 89, 257–274.
Block, N. (1983). Mental pictures and cognitive science. Philosophical Review, 93, 499–542.
Block, N. (1990). Inverted Earth. In J. Tomberlin (Ed.), Philosophical Perspectives 4. Atascadero,

CA: Ridgeview.
Block, N. (1994). Qualia. In S. Guttenplan (Ed.), A Companion to Philosophy of Mind. Oxford:

Oxford University Press.
Block, N. (1995). On a confusion about a function of consciousness. Behavioral and Brain

Sciences, 18(2), 227–247.
Block, N. (1996). Mental Paint and Mental Latex. Philosophical Issues, 7, 19–49.
Block, N. (1999). Sexism, Racism, Ageism and the Nature of Consciousness. Philosophical

Topics, 26(1 & 2).
Block, N. (2002). The Harder Problem of Consciousness. Journal of Philosophy, XCIX(8), 1–35.
Block, N. (2003). Mental Paint. In M. Hahn & B. Ramberg (Eds.), Reflections and Replies:

Essays on the Philosophy of Tyler Burge (pp. 165–200). Cambridge MA: MIT Press.
Block, N. (forthcoming). Functional Reduction. In T. Horgan & M. H. Sabates & D. Sosa

(Eds.), Supervenience in Mind. Cambridge MA: MIT Press.
Block, N., & Fodor, J. A. (1972). What psychological states are not. Philosophical Review, 81,

159–181.
Boghossian, P., & Velleman, J. D. (1989). Color as a secondary quality. Mind, 98, 81–103.
Boghossian, P., & Velleman, J. D. (1991). Physicalist theories of color. Philosophical Review,

100, 67–106.



Wittgenstein and Qualia / 113

Broackes, J. (2007). Black and White and the Inverted Spectrum. The Philosophical Quarterly,
57(227), 161–175.

Burge, T. (2003). Qualia and Intentional Content: Reply to Block. In M. Hahn & B. Ramberg
(Eds.), Reflections and Replies: Essays on the Philosophy of Tyler Burge (pp. 405–416).
Cambridge MA: MIT Press.

Byrne, A. (2001). Intentionalism Defended. The Philosophical Review, 110, 199–240.
Byrne, A. (2006). Inverted Qualia. In E. N. Zalta (Ed.), Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy

(Vol. Winter 2006 Edition). Stanford, CA: The Metaphysics Research Lab of the Center
for the Study of Language and Information

Byrne, A., & Hilbert, D. R. (1997). Colors and reflectances. In A. Byrne & D. R. Hilbert (Eds.),
Readings on Color, Volume 1: The Philosophy of Color: MIT Press.

Byrne, A., & Hilbert, D. R. (2003). Color realism and color science. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 26, 3–21.

Carruthers, P. (2000). Phenomenal Consciousness: A Naturalistic Theory: Cambridge University
Press.

Chalmers, D. (1996). The ConsciousMind: In Search of a Fundamental Theory: Oxford University
Press.

Chalmers, D. (2002). Does Conceivability Entail Possibility. In T. Gendler & J. Hawthorne
(Eds.), Conceivability and Possibility. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Chalmers, D. (2004). The Representational Character of Experience. In B. Leiter (Ed.), The
Future for Philosophy. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Churchland, P. (2002). Brain-Wise: Studies in Neurophilosophy. Cambridge MA: MIT Press.
Churchland, P. M. (1984). Matter and Consciousness. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Churchland, P. M., & Churchland, P. S. (1981). Functionalism, Qualia and Intentionality.

Philosophical Topics, 12(121–132).
Clark, A. (1985). Spectrum Inversion and the Color Solid. Southern Journal Of Philosophy,

23(4), 431–443.
Clark, A. (2000). A Theory of Sentience. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Cohen, J. (2001). Color, Content and Fred: On a Proposed Reductio of the Inverted Spectrum

Hypothesis. Philosphical Studies, 103, 121–144.
Cole, D. (1990). Functionalism and Inverted Spectra. Synthese, 82, 207–222.
Crane, T. (2000). The Origins of Qualia. In T. Crane & S. Patterson (Eds.), History of the

Mind-Body Problem. London: Routledge.
Crane, T. (2001). Elements of Mind. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Davies, M. (1997). Externalism and Experience. In N. Block & O. Flanagan & G. Güzeldere

(Eds.), The Nature of Consciousness: Philosophical Debates (pp. 309–327). Cambridge
MA: MIT Press.

Dennett, D. (1988). Quining Qualia. In A. Marcel & E. Bisiach (Eds.), Consciousness in
Contemporary Science (pp. 381–414). Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Dennett, D. (1991). Consciousness Explained. Boston: Little Brown.
Dennett, D. C. (1968). The nature of images and the introspective trap, Content and Conscious-

ness. London: Routledge.
Dretske, F. (1995). Naturalizing the Mind. Cambridge MA: MIT Press.
Farrell, B. (1950). Experience. Mind, 59, 170–198.
Field, H. (1973). Theory Change and the Indeterminacy of Reference. Journal of Philosophy,

70(14), 462–481.
Frege, G. (1884/1953). The Foundations of Arithmetic. Oxford: Blackwell.
Gendler, T., & Hawthorne, J. (2002). Conceivability and Possibility. Oxford: Oxford University

Press.
Hardin, C. L. (1997). Reinventing the Spectrum. In A. Byrne and D. R. Hilbert (Eds.), Readings

on Color, Volume 1: The Philosophy of Color. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Harman, G. (1990). The Intrinsic Quality of Experience. Philosophical Perspectives, 4, 31–52.



114 / Ned Block

Harrison, B. (1973). Form and Content. Oxford: Blackwell.
Hilbert, D. R., & Kalderon, M. E. (2000). Color and the Inverted Spectrum. In S. Davis (Ed.),

Color Perception: Philosophical, Psychological, Artistic and Computational Perspectives.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Hill, C. S. (1991). Sensations: A Defense of Type Materialism. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.

Horwich, P. (in progress). The ‘Mystery’ of Consciousness, a chapter of an unpublished draft of
a book on Wittgenstein.

Hurley, S. (1998). Consciousness in Action. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Kind, A. (2003). What’s so Transparent about Transparency. Philosophical Studies, 115(3),

225–244.
Kirk, R. (1982). Goodbye to Transposed Qualia. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, 82,

33–44.
Kriegel, U. (2002). Phenomenal Content. Erkentniss, 57, 175–198.
Levine, J. (1991). Cool Red. Philosophical Psychology, 4, 27–40.
Levine, J. (2003). Experience and Representation. In Q. Smith & A. Jokic (Eds.), Consciousness:

New Philosophical Perspectives. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Lewis, D. (1970). How to Define Theoretical Terms. Journal of Philosophy, 67, 427–445.
Linden, D. E. J., Kallenbach, U., Heinecke, A., Singer, W., & Goebel, R. (1999). The myth

of upright vision. A psychophysical and functional imaging study of adaptation to
inverting spectacles. Perception, 28(4), 469–481.

Lycan, W. (1973). Inverted Spectrum. Ratio, 15, 315–319.
Lycan, W. (1996). Consciousness and Experience. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Nagel, T. (1974). What Is it Like to Be a Bat? The Philosophical Review, LXXXIII(4), 435–450.
Neitz, J., & Jacobs, G. (1986). Polymorphisms of long-wavelength cones in normal human color

vision. Nature, 323, 623–625.
Neitz, M., & Neitz, J. (1998). Molecular genetics and the biological basis of color vision. In

W. G. Backhaus & R. Kliegle & J. S. Werner (Eds.), Color Vision: Perspectives from
Different Disciplines. Berlin: DeGreuter.

Nickel, B. (forthcoming). Against Intentionalism. Philosophical Studies.
Nida-Rümelin, M. (1996). Pseudonormal Vision, An Actual Case of Qualia Inversion?

Philosophical Studies, 82, 145–157.
Nida-Rümelin, M. (1999a). Intrinsic Phenomenal Properties in Color Vision Science: A Reply

to Peter Ross. Consciousness and Cognition, 8, 571–574.
Nida-Rümelin, M. (1999b). Pseudonormal Vision and Color Qualia. In S. Hameroff & A.

Kaszniak & D. Chalmers (Eds.), Toward a Science of Consciousness III: The Third
Tucson Discussions and Debates (Vol. III). Cambridge MA: MIT Press.

Palmer, S. (1999). Color, Consciousness and the Isomorphism Constraint. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 22, 923–943.

Pautz, A. (2005). Sensory Awareness is not a Wide Physical Relation. Nous, 40, 205–240.
Peacocke, C. (1993). Review of M. Tye, The Imagery Debate. Phiosophy of Science, 60, 675–677.
Putnam, H. (1967). The nature of mental states. In W. Capitan & D. Merrill (Eds.), Art, Mind,

and Religion. Pittsburgh: Pittsburgh University Press.
Putnam, H. (1981). Reason, Truth and History. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Putnam, H. (1999). The Threefold Cord: Mind, Body andWorld. New York: Columbia University

Press.
Rey, G. (1992). Sensational Sentences Switched. Philosophical Studies, 68, 289–319.
Rey, G. (1998). A Narrow Representationalist Account of Qualitative Experience. Philosphical

Perspectives, 12, 435–458.
Rhees, R. (1968). Notes for Lectures on “Private Experience” and “Sense Data”: Note on the

Text. The Philosophical Review, 77(3), 271–275.



Wittgenstein and Qualia / 115

Ross, P. W. (1999). Color science and spectrum inversion: A reply to Nida Rümelin. Conscious-
ness and Cognition, 8, 566–570.

Shoemaker, S. (1975). Functionalism and Qualia. Philosophical Studies, 27, 291–315.
Shoemaker, S. (1982). The Inverted Spectrum. The Journal of Philosophy, 79, 357–381.
Shoemaker, S. (1984). Postscript to “The Inverted Spectrum”. In S. Shoemaker (Ed.), Identity,

Cause and Mind. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Shoemaker, S. (1994a). Phenomenal Character. Nous, 28, 21–38.
Shoemaker, S. (1994b). Self-knowledge and “inner sense”. Philosophy and Phenomenological

Research, 54, 249–314.
Shoemaker, S. (1996a). Intrasubjective/intersubjective. In S. Shoemaker (Ed.), The first-person

perspective and other essays. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Shoemaker, S. (1996b). The First-Person Perspective and Other Essays. Cambridge, UK:

Cambridge University Press.
Shoemaker, S. (2006). The Frege-Schlick View. In J. Thomson (Ed.), Content and Modality (pp.

18–33). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Stalnaker, R. (1999). Comparing Qualia Across Persons. Philosophical Topics, 26, 385–405.
Stalnaker, R. (2006). Shoemaker, “The Frege-Schlick View”. In J. Thomson (Ed.), Content and

Modality (pp. 254–257). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Stoljar, D. (2006). Ignorance and Imagination. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Taylor, D. (1966). The Incommunicability of Content. Mind, 75, 527–541.
Thau, M. (2002). Consciousness and Cognition. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Tye, M. (1995). Ten Problems of Consciousness. Cambridge MA: MIT Press.
Tye, M. (2000). Consciousness, Color, and Content: MIT Press.
Tye, M. (2002). Representationalism and the Transparency of Experience. Nous, 36(1), 137–151.
White, S. (1986). Curse of the Qualia. Synthese, 68, 333–368.
Wittgenstein, L. (1958). Philosophical Investigations, Second Edition. Oxford: Blackwell.
Wittgenstein, L. (1968). Notes for Lectures on “Private Experience” and “Sense Data”. The

Philosophical Review, 77(3), 275–320.
Wittgenstein, L. (1993). Notes for Lectures on “Private Experience” and “Sense Data”. In J.

Klagge & A. Normann (Eds.), Ludwig Wittgenstein: Philosophical Occasions 1912–
1951. Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing Company.


