











































A true science of consciousness explains phenomenology: comment on Cohen and Dennett


A true science of consciousness explains
phenomenology: comment on Cohen and Dennett

Johannes J. Fahrenfort1,2 and Victor A.F. Lamme1,2

1Brain & Cognition, Department of Psychology, University of Amsterdam, Weesperplein 4, 1018 XA Amsterdam, The Netherlands
2Cognitive Science Center Amsterdam (CSCA), University of Amsterdam, Plantage Muidergracht 22-24, 1018 TV Amsterdam,
The Netherlands

In their recent article in TiCS [1], Cohen and Dennett
propose that consciousness is inextricably tied to one’s
ability to report about the contents of experience (an
‘access-only’ theory). They contrast this with theories that
distinguish mechanisms that create the contents of expe-
rience frommechanisms that allow one to report about this
content (‘phenomenal-access’ theories). These they claim to
be unfalsifiable, and therefore beyond the realm of science.
We argue below that this assertion is wrong and based on a
misguided belief about what a theory of consciousness
needs to explain.

Cohen and Dennett maintain that phenomenal-access
theories are ‘dissociative’, as though these theories propose
mechanisms of consciousness that are devoid of function.
They seem to suggest that access itself is the function that
needs to be explained. Hence, in their description of a

‘perfect experiment’, access is the only test of whether
something is experienced. However, their setup does not
clarify how the contents of experience come about, and
therefore by its very nature has no explanatory power. A
real perfect experiment would provide the neural mecha-
nisms that explain functional properties of consciousness
(Figure 1).

Suchmechanisms should be able to integrate contextual
information across the visual field, making inferences
about its input while resolving perceptual ambiguity. They
should be able to dynamically group image elements to-
gether, creating perceptual unity and perceptual organi-
zation. It is well established that object features are
represented by neurons with receptive fields that are too
small to achieve such integration. So how could a distrib-
uted network such as the brain achieve this? The theory of

[(Figure_1)TD$FIG]

Veridical:Perceived:

Stimulus set 2.

Stimulus set 3.

BA

A

B

Stimulus set 1.

A

B

A

B

A

B

TRENDS in Cognitive Sciences 

Figure 1. The perfect experiment. During the extended checkerboard shadow illusion (stimulus set 1), the perceived color of surfaces and objects are dependent on the
context in which they are presented. Even though the surfaces in A and B emit light with identical wavelengths, they have very different perceptual properties. Conversely,
the apples seem to have the same color, whereas in fact apple B is much darker than apple A. During the Ponzo illusion (stimulus set 2), the bar in condition A is perceived to
be longer than the bar in condition B, whereas in fact they are equal in size. During the Kanisza illusion (stimulus set 3), condition A induces the perception of a triangle lying
on top of the inducers, whereas condition B lacks such surface perception. If, under a wide range of circumstances, one can establish neural mechanisms that are
consistently tied to the perceptual (as opposed to the veridical) state of visual input, while in addition having functional properties that explain these states, then by current
scientific standards, one may infer that these mechanisms are involved in generating the contents of experience. If these putative mechanisms (purple) remain when the
neural mechanisms of access (green) are removed, one should conclude that consciousness without access exists. If consciousness critically depends on access, the
hypothesis that perception without access exists is falsified.

Corresponding author: Fahrenfort, J.J. (j.j.fahrenfort@uva.nl); Lamme, V.A.F. (v.a.f.lamme@uva.nl).

Letters Trends in Cognitive Sciences March 2012, Vol. 16, No. 3

138

mailto:j.j.fahrenfort@uva.nl
mailto:v.a.f.lamme@uva.nl


local recurrency argues that neurons with receptive fields
large enough to encapsulate entire objects, bind together
features through recurrent interactions, subserving image
segmentation and perceptual organization [2]. In the the-
ory of coalitions of neurons [3], neurons engage in the
formation of coalitions that represent unified percepts of
otherwise distributed information. The functional property
that these theories have in common can be loosely summed
up as the ability to integrate or bind information across
spatially separated sets of neurons to infer perceptual
rather than physical attributes of visual stimuli [4,5].
Phenomenal-access theories propose that this property
explains key elements of conscious experience, as many
observations show that it is characteristic of the emergence
of phenomenology [2,6]. Importantly, perceptual organiza-
tion does not require selective attention [6,7], but rather
serves as input for it [8,9]. Thus, although access-only
theories allege that representations are only phenomenal
when reported, access itself does not seem to be involved in
generating the contents of experience, and therefore it has
little power to explain phenomenology [10].

Now if it turns out that the neural mechanisms of
perception established in our perfect experiment subside
when their contents cannot be accessed- as when the green
connections in Figure 1 are lesioned out as Cohen and
Dennett propose- the idea of phenomenology without ac-
cess would be falsified. In that case, and only then, access
would need to be incorporated into theories of phenome-
nology. If however, given the stimuli presented in Figure 1,
these neuralmechanisms continue signaling the perceptual
states corresponding to condition A and condition B, even
though subjects are not able to report about them, the

parsimonious account is to infer that perceptual states
continue to exist without access. According to Cohen and
Dennett however, these mechanisms can no longer be
trusted to operate as previously established, only because
the subject has lost his or her ability to report on them. If
anything, rather than disproving the scientific validity of
phenomenal-access theories, this step places ‘access-only’
theories outside the realm of science.

References
1 Cohen, M.A. and Dennett, D.C. (2011) Consciousness cannot be

separated from function. Trends Cogn. Sci. 15, 358–364
2 Roelfsema, P.R. (2006) Cortical algorithms for perceptual grouping.

Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 29, 203–227
3 Crick, F. and Koch, C. (2003) A framework for consciousness. Nat.

Neurosci. 6, 119–126
4 Singer, W. and Gray, C.M. (1995) Visual feature integration and

the Temporal Correlation Hypothesis. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 18, 555–
586

5 Tononi, G. and Edelman, G.M. (1998) Consciousness and complexity.
Science 282, 1846–1851

6 Super, H. et al. (2001) Two distinct modes of sensory processing
observed in monkey primary visual cortex (V1). Nat. Neurosci. 4,
304–310

7 Scholte, H.S. et al. (2006) The influence of inattention on the neural
correlates of scene segmentation. Brain. Res. 1076, 106–115

8 Qiu, F.T.T. et al. (2007) Figure-ground mechanisms provide structure
for selective attention. Nat. Neurosci. 10, 1492–1499

9 Roelfsema, P.R. et al. (2007) Different processing phases for features,
figures, and selective attention in the primary visual cortex.Neuron 56,
785–792

10 Lamme, V.A.F. (2010) How neuroscience will change our view on
consciousness. Cogn. Neurosci. 1, 204–220

1364-6613/$ – see front matter ! 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.tics.2012.01.004 Trends in Cognitive Sciences, March 2012, Vol. 16, No. 3

Response to Fahrenfort and Lamme: defining
reportability, accessibility and sufficiency in conscious
awareness

Michael A. Cohen1 and Daniel C. Dennett2

1Vision Sciences Laboratory, Department of Psychology, William James Hall, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA
2Center for Cognitive Studies, Department of Philosophy, Tufts University, Medford, MA 02155, USA

In their letter to TiCS [1], Fahrenfort and Lamme (F&L)
bring up two issues in response to our position [2] that we
address here.

The first issue concerns the relationship between access
and reportability. F&L write that we ‘propose that con-
sciousness is inextricably tied to one’s ability to report about
the contents of an experience’. Their criticism seems to rest
on the belief that we claim that consciousness is tied to the
ability to do things such as talk or press a button. This is not
our view. If it were, it would clearly be wrong: information
can be conscious yet verbally unreportable. Some patients
with locked-in syndrome or who are in a persistent vegeta-

tive statehavebeen identifiedas consciouseven though they
cannot talk about their experiences. However, it must be
stressed that these patients do still report their experiences
by engaging in mental-imagery tasks during functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and it is these ‘reports’
that allow clinicians to identify these patients as conscious
[3–5]. What enables the willful modulation of mental imag-
ery? The mechanisms of access: attention, memory, deci-
sion-making, and so on. Without these mechanisms, a
patient could not hold the instructions in memory, attend
to thewordsbeing spokenover the sounds of the scannerand
decide to imagine the stimuli that correspond with a pre-
designated answer. Without these mechanisms, there
would be no reason to believe that these patients are con-
scious of anything at all.

Corresponding author: Cohen, M.A. (michaelthecohen@gmail.com);
Dennett, D.C. (daniel.dennett@tufts.edu).

Letters Trends in Cognitive Sciences March 2012, Vol. 16, No. 3

139

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2012.01.004
mailto:michaelthecohen@gmail.com
mailto:daniel.dennett@tufts.edu

	A true science of consciousness explains phenomenology: comment on Cohen and Dennett
	References


