



































jcn00530 955..969


Seeing without Knowing: Neural Signatures of Perceptual
Inference in the Absence of Report

Annelinde R. E. Vandenbroucke1, Johannes J. Fahrenfort2,
Ilja G. Sligte1,3, and Victor A. F. Lamme1

Abstract

■ Every day, we experience a rich and complex visual world.
Our brain constantly translates meaningless fragmented input
into coherent objects and scenes. However, our attentional
capabilities are limited, and we can only report the few items that
we happen to attend to. So what happens to items that are not
cognitively accessed? Do these remain fragmentary and meaning-
less? Or are they processed up to a level where perceptual infer-
ences take place about image composition? To investigate this,
we recorded brain activity using fMRI while participants viewed
images containing a Kanizsa figure, an illusion in which an ob-
ject is perceived by means of perceptual inference. Participants
were presented with the Kanizsa figure and three matched non-
illusory control figures while they were engaged in an attention-

ally demanding distractor task. After the task, one group of
participants was unable to identify the Kanizsa figure in a
forced-choice decision task; hence, they were “inattentionally
blind.” A second group had no trouble identifying the Kanizsa
figure. Interestingly, the neural signature that was unique to
the processing of the Kanizsa figure was present in both groups.
Moreover, within-subject multivoxel pattern analysis showed that
the neural signature of unreported Kanizsa figures could be used
to classify reported Kanizsa figures and that this cross-report clas-
sification worked better for the Kanizsa condition than for the
control conditions. Together, these results suggest that stimuli
that are not cognitively accessed are processed up to levels of
perceptual interpretation. ■

INTRODUCTION

Perception does not directly emerge from the physical
stimulation of photoreceptor cells in the retina. Rather,
the brain continuously interprets incoming information
to make sense of it: Through perceptual inference, visual
input is translated from meaningless fragmented input
into bound objects and scenes. For example, when we
see a pen lying on top of a paper, we do not perceive
the paper as having a pen-shaped hole in it. Instead, the
paper is filled in underneath the pen, and we perceive
the paper as an uninterrupted rectangle. In this study,
we investigated whether this type of inference depends
on the ability to attend to and cognitively access visual per-
cepts. When a part of the visual field is neither attended
nor reported, does vision represent its constituent parts
as consisting of bound and completed objects? Or do they
remain fragmentary and meaningless? The answer to this
question has important implications for understanding
the nature of vision and may ultimately change our view
on conscious perception.
A prime example of perceptual inference is the Kanizsa

illusion (Kanizsa, 1976), in which a set of inducers is aligned
in such a way that observers perceive an occluding sur-

face lying on top of black disks (Figure 1A). This occluding
object is defined by illusory contours and by the illusory
contrast difference between surface and background. The
illusory contours and illusory contrast difference do not
emerge when the inducers are not properly aligned (Fig-
ure 1B and D) or when the inducers are not likely to be
completed as occluded objects (Figure 1C). The formation
of the illusion involves feedback from higher-level visual
areas such as the lateral occipital complex (LOC) to lower
visual areas V1/ V2 (Knebel & Murray, 2012; Maertens,
Pollmann, Hanke, Mildner, & Möller, 2008; Halgren,
Mendola, Chong, & Dale, 2003; Lee & Nguyen, 2001;
Seghier et al., 2000). Moreover, the perceptual nature of
the Kanizsa figure has been shown to depend on activa-
tion in these regions in a reverse hierarchical manner
(Wokke, Vandenbroucke, Scholte, & Lamme, 2013). These
studies suggest that the inference mechanisms at play
in the Kanizsa illusion depend on interactions between
functionally divergent visual areas.

A remarkable observation is that when the inducers of
the figure are rendered invisible by continuous flash sup-
pression, the illusion is not perceived, even when attended,
showing that perception of the Kanizsa illusion requires
conscious processing of the inducers (Harris, Schwarzkopf,
Song, Bahrami, & Rees, 2011). This is in contrast with the
simultaneous brightness illusion—an illusion of a white disc
seeming brighter when presented on a black background

1University of Amsterdam, 2University of Utrecht, 3University of
Birmingham

© 2014 Massachusetts Institute of Technology Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 26:5, pp. 955–969
doi:10.1162/jocn_a_00530



than on a gray background—that persists even when the
background is not perceived because of flash suppression.
Perceptual inference in the Kanizsa illusion thus occurs
at a higher level of processing and is susceptible to manipu-
lations that selectively interfere with conscious percep-
tion. Studying to what extent the processes underlying the
Kanizsa illusion require conscious access or reportability
is therefore of direct relevance to the question whether
access is necessary for the formation of a full perceptual
representation.

To investigate whether the neural correlates of per-
ceiving a Kanizsa figure are present when participants do
not cognitively access the figure, we combined an inatten-
tional blindness paradigm (Scholte, Witteveen, Spekreijse,
& Lamme, 2006; Rees, Russell, Frith, & Driver, 1999;
Rensink, OʼRegan, & Clark, 1997) with fMRI measure-
ments. Inattentional blindness occurs when a participant
is attentionally engaged in another task, rendering a non-
target stimulus unnoticed and unreported even when ex-
plicitly asked about it. When participants are informed
about the presence of a certain stimulus during the task,
however, they have no trouble seeing the stimulus, even
when engaged in the distractor task. This suggests that
their inability to report these stimuli occurs because they
simply did not access them, not because of perceptual
load (Lavie, 2005; Yi, Woodman, Widders, Marois, &
Chun, 2004). The paradigm of inattentional blindness for-
malizes the common intuition that many stimuli in plain
sight remain unnoticed and are therefore never accessed,
although they are potentially accessible.

In an fMRI scanner, participants performed an attention-
ally demanding 2-back letter task, whereas the Kanizsa

and three control figures (Figure 1A–D) were presented
surrounding the letters (Figure 1E). Participants were
instructed that black “distractor” stimuli would be flashed
around the letters, but that they should focus on the
letter task to maximize their score on the 2-back task. After
three runs of the task, participants were unexpectedly
asked whether they had seen which figure was presented
surrounding the letters. The participants that were unable
to select the correct option were labeled as “inattentionally
blind” (IB). If participants selected the Kanizsa figure,
they were labeled as “not inattentionally blind” (NIB). We
employed univariate and multivariate analysis techniques
to compare the Kanizsa illusion to the three control figures.
This allowed us to determine a neural signature that is
unique to the illusion. The presence of a unique signature
for the Kanizsa illusion for both IB and NIB participants
would indicate that access is not required to process the
illusion. If, however, only NIB participants show a unique
signature of the illusion, this would suggest that processing
the illusion requires access mechanisms.

METHODS

fMRI Acquisition

Forty-two students (three men) from the University of
Amsterdam participated in the experiment for course
credit or a monetary reward. The experiment was ap-
proved by the local ethics committee, and participants
gave their written informed consent. All participants had
normal or corrected-to-normal vision and were screened
on the possibility of metal in their bodies and other risk

Figure 1. Stimuli and task
design. The four stimuli used
in the experiment were
(A) A Kanizsa figure, (B) A Kanizsa
control figure, (C) A line figure
(same spatial layout and center
of gravity as Kanizsa figure),
and (D) A line control figure.
(E) Participants performed
a 2-back task in which they
detected the repetition of a
letter that was presented two
serial positions before. Letters
were presented for 600 msec
each and every 1200 msec;
one of the four figures was
presented around the letters
for 400 msec. Each figure
was presented 12 times in a
row, resulting in a blocked
design with blocks lasting
14.4 sec.

956 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience Volume 26, Number 5



factors precluding participation in MRI studies. Scanning
was performed on a 3T Philips Achieva MRI scanner at
the Spinoza Center in Amsterdam. A high-resolution
T1-weighted anatomical image (repetition time [TR] =
8.21 msec, echo time = 3.81 msec, field of view = 256 ×
256 × 160) was recorded for each participant. fMRI was
recorded using a gradient-echo, echo-planar pulse se-
quence (TR = 2000 msec, echo time = 27.63 msec, flip
angle = 90°, 27 slices with interleaved acquisition, voxel
size = 2 × 2 × 3 mm, 96 × 96 matrix, field of view =
89 × 89 × 192) centered around the calcarine sulcus.
Stimuli were back-projected on a 61 × 36 cm LCD screen
using Presentation software (Neurobehavioral Systems,
Inc., Albany, CA) and viewed through a mirror attached
to the head coil.

Stimuli

To isolate the neural signature associated with the Kanizsa
figure, the figure was compared with three control figures
(Figure 1B–D). In addition to the classical control figure
in which the inducers are rotated (Figure 1B; Mendola,
Dale, Fischl, Liu, & Tootell, 1999), we used two additional
figures (Figure 1C–D) to control for potential confounds.
The Kanizsa illusion has both cognitive and perceptual
attributes when compared with its traditional control fig-
ure. One can cognitively infer a pentagon from the layout
of the Kanizsa figure by connecting the lines between the
“pacmen” inducers; similar to, for example, knowing that
a car has moved because the second time you see it, it is
in a different location versus actually perceiving the move-
ment of the car (Pylyshyn, 1999). Importantly, the illusion
also has perceptual attributes: The surface of the pentagon
seems to be “real,” as the surface of the pentagon is per-
ceived as slightly brighter than the gray background and
as lying on top of full disks instead of pacmen. Completion
of the pacmen to full disks and the increased brightness
are perceptually inferred (Nakayama & Shimojo, 1992;
Kanizsa, 1974). Using the traditional control figure in which
the inducers are rotated outward does not allow one to
tease apart the perceptual aspects of the illusion (comple-
tion of the disks, illusory contours, and the brightness
illusion) from its cognitive aspects (presence or absence
of a pentagon). Therefore, we devised two additional
control figures that isolate the cognitive attributes of the
illusion (Figure 1C–D) using “hats” instead of pacmen
inducers. In these control figures, a pentagon shape is
either present or absent, yet only by cognitive inference
and without the perceptual inferences that characterize
the Kanizsa illusion.
The additional control figures also allowed us to cir-

cumvent other confounds in the traditional control con-
dition. Particularly, it could be argued that the Kanizsa
with rotated inducers is not a perfect control: Inwardly
rotated inducers create an image with a different low
spatial frequency content compared with an image with
outwardly rotated inducers (there is a larger “white gap”

in the former; see Davis & Driver, 1998). If this is an
important factor driving the neural signals we record, a
difference found between the Kanizsa figure and its out-
ward rotated counterpart should also be found between
the line figure and its outward rotated control that contain
a similar spatial frequency difference. Together, the three
controls (Figure 1B–D) allowed us to assess the unique
influence of the illusory nature of the Kanizsa (Figure 1A)
on cortical processing when compared with more cogni-
tive or low-level influences on stimulus processing.

The four figures (one Kanizsa, three control) consisted
of five black inducers placed on a gray background (Fig-
ure 1A–D). The Kanizsa figure (Figure 1A, total span =
12.6° × 12.7°) and its control (Figure 1B, total span =
13.1° × 13.2°) consisted of pacmen-like inducers; five black
circles (diameter = 2.6°) with a gap taken out (width =
2.1°, angle = 78°). The Line figure (Figure 1C, total
span = 12.6° × 12.5°) and its control (Figure 1D, total
span = 13.4° × 13.2°) consisted of hat-like inducers
(2.3° × 2.4°): line elements with a rectangle on top that
had the same gap angle. In the Kanizsa figure, the inducers
were aligned in such a way that a pentagon could be in-
ferred lying on top of black discs. The support ratio (the
length of the real contours relative to the illusory contour)
of the Kanizsa figure is strongly related to the perception
of the illusion. In this study, we used a support ratio of
0.42, which is sufficient to produce the illusion (Wokke
et al., 2013; Seghier & Vuilleumier, 2006). In the classical
Kanizsa control condition, the inducers were rotated 180°
around their center of gravity—that was calculated by
taking the pixel for which the amount of black pixels sur-
rounding it was equal above and below, left and right. This
was done to evenly divide the mass of the figures over the
visual field and prevented the Kanizsa control figure from
having more mass toward the center of the screen. Differ-
ences in the distribution of contrast discontinuities across
the visual field can easily be picked up by simple spatial
frequency filters (Becker & Knopp, 1978; Ginsburg, 1975),
which might result in different responses to a Kanizsa
and a classical control Kanizsa that has nothing to do with
the perception of an illusion. The Line figure, which con-
stituted the second control figure, resembled the Kanizsa
figure in its spatial layout, and its inducers had the same
center of gravity as the Kanizsa inducers. In this figure, a
pentagon could be inferred; however, the illusion of con-
tours and a contrast difference between surface and back-
ground was not present. The Line figure was compared
with a third control figure, which contained the same ele-
ments as the Line figure, but now rotated 180° around their
center of gravity, just as the Kanizsa control figure.

Behavioral Task

Participants performed a 2-back task on letters that were
presented in a Rapid Serial Visual Presentation. They
were instructed to press a button when the same letter
was presented as two serial positions before. Letters

Vandenbroucke et al. 957



(0.5°) were presented in the center of the screen for
600 msec each. In every sequence of eight letters, a repeti-
tion occurred (jittered between Locations 3 and 8), and
a total of 78 sequences was presented. At the end of each
run, participants received feedback about the percentage
of correctly detected targets.

Procedure

Participants were informed that they were participating
in a study on the ability to perform a memory task
while visually distracted. Before the start of the MRI ses-
sion, they practiced the behavioral task for blocks of
2 min until they reached a performance of at least 80%.
Then, they performed a block of around 6 min, the same
length as in the MRI scanner. During this block, distracter
stimuli were presented surrounding the letters. These
distracter stimuli were similar to those used in the ac-
tual experiment, consisting of black stimuli (rectangles
and half circles) at the same position and changing every
14.4 sec. However, they did not form a Kanizsa figure
and were intended to get participants used to the flash-
ing stimuli while focusing on the letter task.

Each functional run started with 10-sec fixation. Sub-
sequently, two letter sequences (9.6 sec) were presented.
After two sequences, the first surrounding figure was pre-
sented for four sequences (18.8 sec). It was expected that
the first presentation of a figure would elicit a heightened
activity because of its sudden onset regardless of figure
type. We therefore presented a figure that was different
from the four experimental figures at the start of each
run (consisting of five half circles presented at the same
position as the inducers of the four experimental figures).
This way, none of the experimental figures had the ad-
vantage of being the first figure that was presented. After
the presentation of the start figure, the four experimental
figures were presented surrounding the letters in blocks
of 14.4 sec (Figure 1E). In each block, one of the four
figures was flashed around the letters with a duration of

400 msec and an ISI of 800 msec, making a total of 12 pre-
sentations per block. There was no rest between blocks,
and the same figure was never repeated. The blocks were
counterbalanced such that each figure was followed by
one of the other figures for an equal amount of times.
In each run, six blocks of each stimulus were presented,
resulting in a total of 24 blocks per run. Each run ended
with a 16-sec rest period, making the total runtime
400 sec (200 volumes).
After three runs in the scanner, participants were pre-

sented with a surprise question. In this question, partici-
pants were informed that the black stimuli surrounding
the letters had formed figures and that they should
choose the figure they thought had been presented dur-
ing the three runs. After reading this question, they re-
ceived eight options (Figure 2), of which only one
contained the illusory Kanizsa figure that was presented
during the experimental runs. They were asked to
choose one of these options, even if they had to guess.
We embedded two other Kanizsa-type figures (Figure 2B
and C) to prevent participants from guessing the Kanizsa
figure because it was the figure that popped out com-
pared with the other figures. All participants that selected
the correct figure were categorized as NIB, as they might
have either explicit or implicit knowledge or familiarity
with the figure, even if they felt they were guessing. All
participants that selected an incorrect figure were labeled
IB. After participants answered the surprise question, the
correct answer was not given to them. Instead, they were
asked to perform the exact same run again and, while
performing the letter task, to try to detect which of the
eight options was shown. The control run was identical
to the experimental runs. After the control run, partici-
pants were asked again to identify the correct figure from
the same eight options, after which the correct answer
was revealed. Only participants that had answered the
second question correctly were included in further ana-
lyses, ensuring their ability to perform the letter task
and detect the Kanizsa figure at the same time.

Figure 2. The eight options
presented in the multiple
choice question after
Experimental Runs 1–3 and
the control run. For the NIB
group, option A was chosen by
all participants after Runs 1–3
and the control run. For the
IB group, option A was never
chosen after Runs 1–3. Instead,
option B was chosen five
times, option C was chosen
two times, option F was chosen
two times, option H was chosen
three times, and options D, E,
and G were never chosen.
After the control run, all
participants chose option A.

958 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience Volume 26, Number 5



ROI Localization

For each participant, V1, V2, V3, V3AB, and V4 (Figure 3)
were localized using a polar angle mapping, an eccen-
tricity mapping, and a study specific localizer. For polar
and eccentricity mapping, we used standard procedures
such as described by Wandell and Winawer (2011). For
polar angle mapping, a checkerboard (red–green, flicker-
ing at 8 Hz) wedge rotated around fixation (complete re-
volution in 30 sec, eight repetitions), and for eccentricity
mapping, a checkerboard ring (red–green, flickering at
8 Hz) expanded from center to periphery (complete
revolution in 30 sec, eight repetitions). During these two
runs, participants fixated at the center while detecting blue
squares presented in the red–green checkerboard stimuli.
The TR of these two runs was set to 2500msec as the phase
of the wedge, and expanding ring was set at 2500 msec
(six phases resulted in one cycle of 15 sec). In addition
to the retinotopic mapping, a study-specific localizer was
used in which a black circle (diameter = 2.6°; flickering
at 2 Hz in 16-sec blocks) presented in the center of the
screen was alternated with five black circles presented at
the inducer positions (total figure 12.7° × 12.7°, flickering
at 2 Hz in 16-sec blocks). These two conditions were
separated by a 16-sec rest period and were repeated five

times. Throughout the run, participants maintained fixa-
tion and performed a fixation task in which they had
to detect a rotation of the fixation cross. Data of these
runs were projected onto an inflated surface reconstruc-
tion, and ROIs were defined for each participant (see
Figure 3). To define our ROIs, we followed the map-
ping procedure as described by Wandell and Winawer
(2011). Because processing in the peripheral part of the
visual regions might differ because of low-level feature
differences in the inducers, we excluded these regions
based on the stimulus-specific mapper. Activity for the
inner circle was contrasted with activity for the outer
circles, and a border was drawn from which only the
inner part was taken as ROI (Figure 3A). Also, we did
not include the foveal part of V1, V2, and V3, as foveal
confluence makes it difficult to distinguish between
these regions. V3A and V3B have a shared center and
were in some participants hard to distinguish. We there-
fore took the central part of these regions together as
one ROI.

In addition to these lower visual areas, LOCwas localized
using a mapper in which blocks of houses, faces, objects
(chairs, scissors, bottles), and phase-scrambled versions
of these objects were presented (Scholte, Jolij, Fahrenfort,
& Lamme, 2008). Each block lasted 16 sec (eight presen-
tations of 1000 msec per block) with a rest of 12 sec be-
tween each block. Each stimulus category was repeated
four times. Activity for the contrast between objects and
scrambled pictures was mapped on an inflated surface
reconstruction, and LOC was defined for each participant.
When contrasting objects against nonobjects, often find a
more dorsal and a more ventral cluster are found (for an
overview, see Wandell & Winawer, 2011). As in our partici-
pant pool, the ventral LOC cluster was most pronounced,
we chose to take the ventral region as ROI (Figure 3). All
localizer runs were performed during the same session as
the experimental runs.

Univariate fMRI Analysis

Data were analyzed using Brainvoyager 2.1 (Brain Innova-
tion, Maastricht, The Netherlands; Goebel, Esposito, &
Formisano, 2006) andMatlab 2010 (MathWorks, Inc., Natick,
MA). Functional scans were slice-time corrected, motion
corrected, spatially smoothed with a Gaussian of 2 mm
FWHM, and high-pass filtered using a general linear model
(GLM) with Fourier basis set (three cycles). All functional
scans were aligned to the first functional scan, which was
coregistered to the T1-weighted anatomical image. Struc-
tural images were transformed to Talairach space using an
ACPC transform (Talairach & Tournoux, 1988).

A GLM with five predictors (four experimental fig-
ures and a start figure) was defined for each participant.
A whole-brain analysis (correcting for multiple compari-
sons using a false discovery rate [FDR] of 0.05) was per-
formed for the two groups separately, combining the

Figure 3. ROIs. Each individualsʼ cortex was inflated and a retinotopic
map (A, depicted here on a representative participant), eccentricity map,
study-specific localizer, and a mapping for LOC (also shown here) were
projected onto the inflated surface. On the basis of these mappings,
six ROIs (V1, V2, V3, V3A/B, V4, LOC) were identified for each participant
(B, depicted here on the representative participant in A). The gray line in
A represents the border between the central visual region and the
periphery where the inducers were presented.

Vandenbroucke et al. 959



three experimental runs (z-transformed) for each partici-
pant. For the ROI analyses, the GLM was modeled in each
participant and ROI separately for the three experimental
runs combined. To test the effect of Figure, ROI, and
Group, a 4 (Figure: Kanizsa, Kanizsa Control, Lines, Lines
Control) × 6 (ROI: V1, V2, V3, V3AB, V4, LOC) × 2 (Group:
IB vs NIB) mixed repeated-measures ANOVA on the beta
values was performed.

Multivariate fMRI Analysis

The same preprocessing steps as described for the uni-
variate analyses were performed. For each block sepa-
rately, the response for each voxel in each ROI was
calculated. This was done by first z-transforming the
whole time series and then averaging over six volumes
following the first stimulus presentation in a block, with
a 2 volume delay to account for the hemodynamic lag.
The response for each block of the three experimental
runs was fed into a training algorithm implemented
in the Princeton MVPA Toolbox (code.google.com/p/
princeton-mvpa-toolbox) using the backpropagation
algorithm of the Netlab Neural Network Toolbox (www1.
aston.ac.uk/eas/research/groups/ncrg/resources/netlab/).
This yielded a specific voxel pattern for each figure in
each ROI (all voxels in each ROI were used). First, the
four figures were classified within experimental runs by
training on two experimental runs (while participants
were IB) and testing the remaining experimental run
in a leave-one-out procedure. Then, the patterns of the
blocks in the control run (while participants no longer
suffered IB) were classified based on the three experi-
mental runs together. For each iteration, the training
runs were used to maximally distinguish the four neural
patterns underlying each figure. Then, the labels that were
given to figure presentations in the test run were classi-
fied as correct or not (1 or 0). This yielded a percentage
correct for each figure presentation.

For both the experimental and the control run, we
thus obtained a classification score (percentage correct)
for each figure per participant per ROI. Chance perfor-
mance was calculated for each individual and each training
set by shuffling the test labels 1000 times and calculating
the baseline performance on each figure for each specific
training set. This allowed us to determine whether the
training sets had a bias toward favoring one stimulus, thus
creating an actual chance performance that differed from
the expected 25% (based on four figures). On average,
chance performance was 25% correct for each figure. To
investigate whether classification of the Kanizsa figure
was better than classification of the three control figures
and whether there were any differences between the
two groups, a 4 (Figure: Kanizsa, Kanizsa Control, Lines,
Lines Control) × 6 (ROI: V1, V2, V3, V3AB, V4, LOC) ×
2 (Group: IB vs. NIB) mixed repeated-measures ANOVA
was performed.

RESULTS

Behavioral Performance

Of 42 participants, 5 participants did not select the correct
answer after the control run, and these were excluded
from all analyses. Twelve participants did not select the
correct answer after the three experimental runs but
did select the correct answer after the control run (IB
group). From the participants that were correct on both
questions, 12 participants (NIB group) were matched to
the IB group on age (IB: 20.3 years, NIB: 20.2 years),
sex (all women) and overall performance on the letter
task (IB: 88%, NIB: 83%, F(1, 22) = 1.345, p = .259).
There was a main effect of task, showing that n-back per-
formance during the experimental runs was higher than
performance during the control run (87% vs. 83%), F(1,
22) = 6.703, p = .017. This was probably because of the
fact that participants were slightly engaged in detecting
the correct figure during the control task. However, this
slight performance decrement was the same for both
groups, F(1, 22) = .016, p = .900.

Univariate fMRI Analysis

We examined visual areas that are known to be involved
in generating the Kanizsa illusion (for an overview, see
Seghier & Vuilleumier, 2006). We defined ROIs for V1,
V2, V3, V3AB, V4, and LOC based on retinotopic and
object-specific localizers (see Figure 3 and Methods). For
each of these regions, a GLM was fitted to determine the
activity corresponding to each condition (Figure 4). We
compared the mean activity for each figure and the activity
for the two groups by performing a 4 (Figure: Kanizsa,
Kanizsa Control, Lines, Lines Control) × 6 (ROI: V1, V2,
V3, V3AB, V4, LOC) × 2 (Group: NIB vs. IB) mixed
repeated-measures ANOVA. A significant effect of Figure
was found, F(3, 66) = 13.8, p < .001, showing that the
Kanizsa illusion resulted in stronger activations of both
lower- and higher-tier visual areas compared with the three
control figures, post hoc t tests: all p < .002, Bonferroni-
corrected. Moreover, the amount of activity for the Line
figure and its control did not significantly differ, post hoc
t test: p > .999, Bonferonni-corrected, suggesting that
these two figures could not be dissociated based on activ-
ity in these visual areas. This shows that, although cognitive
inference is possible for the Line figure (i.e., a pentagon
can be inferred because logically, it is the only possible
configuration), there is no specific visual neural signature
that accompanies the figure. This confirms that there is
no perceptual inference for the Line figure and the height-
ened activity associated with the Kanizsa illusion was
because of the perceptual characteristics of the illusion
and not because of other visual properties such as layout,
spatial frequency, collinear contours, or the “cognitive
binding” of the inducers into a single object.
The Kanizsa illusion elicited heightened activity across

all of visual cortex, regardless of whether participants

960 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience Volume 26, Number 5



reported the figure. The lack of an interaction effect
showed that the pattern of activation for the four figures
was the same for the NIB and the IB group, F(3, 66) =
.2, p = .90. This suggests that the Kanizsa illusion is
processed even when the percept is not accessed or re-
ported. There were seven participants in the IB group
who chose one of the two Kanizsa-type foils in the experi-
mental question (Figure 2). Although these foils have a
different perceptual appearance than the target Kanizsa,
it could be that these participants were able to report
that they saw a Kanizsa-type figure but were not able to
report the details of the figure they saw. To investigate

whether the results of the IB group were determined
by these participants, we analyzed the five participants
who chose option D–H to see whether the pattern of
results was the same. Although statistical testing with five
participants yields too little power, the pattern for these
five participants was similar to the pattern for the whole
group (Figure 5).

In addition to a main effect of Figure, there was a main
effect of ROI, F(2.05, 45.06) = 30.5, p< .001, Greenhouse–
Geisser corrected, and an interaction between Figure and
ROI, F(6.71, 147.78) = 5.6, p < .001, Greenhouse–Geisser
corrected. The main effect of ROI was driven by the fact

Figure 5. Univariate results for the whole IB group (A) and the five
participants that chose a non-Kanizsa-type figure in the experimental
question (B, see Figure 2). The activity pattern for the whole group
and these five participants is similar, showing that the results are
not dominated by the participants that selected a Kanizsa-type foil.

Figure 4. Univariate results for the experimental runs. Activity
(in normalized arbitrary units) associated with the four figures in
each ROI for the NIB group (A) and the IB group (B). In both
groups, the Kanizsa figure elicited more activity across lower and
higher visual areas. Error bars denote SE.

Vandenbroucke et al. 961



that overall activity in V1 was lower and activity in LOC
was higher than the other ROIs. The interaction effect
revealed that the difference between the three figures
was largest in V3AB and smaller in LOC. The involvement
of V3AB in addition to LOC has been found in previous
literature as well (Mendola et al., 1999). No interaction ef-
fects with Group were found, all p > .115, Greenhouse–
Geisser corrected, suggesting that the pattern of activity
across ROIs was similar for the IB and NIB group.

To further investigate whether there were any differ-
ences between the NIB and the IB group apart from the
ROIs specified, a multisubject whole-brain analysis was
performed (note that the scans did not cover the front of
the brain). Figure 6 shows the multisubject whole-brain
analyses for the two groups separately (FDR = .05), which
show that mainly the lower visual areas are involved, simi-
larly for the NIB and IB group. There were no regions that
were significantly more activated for the NIB group for the
Kanizsa figures versus the other figures (FDR = .05).

We found a very clear and statistically strong modulation
of activity in lower and higher visual areas for the Kanizsa
figures compared with its control. That there was no dif-
ference in this pattern between the NIB and IB group sug-
gests that the Kanizsa figure is processed similarly for the
two groups. However, these conclusions are based on a
null-result and therefore hard to interpret. Perhaps, if we
would have tested more participants, a difference be-
tween groups would have become evident. Nevertheless,
in both groups, the Kanizsa figure elicited more activity
compared with its controls was clearly manifested, and
testing more participants would not diminish this effect.
Therefore, a potential difference between groups could
only reveal a difference in the strength of the modulation.

Our univariate analyses were based on a between-
subject design, making it more difficult to compare the
neural patterns for reported and unreported conditions.
Therefore, we performed multivariate analyses within
participants. To define the consistency between the con-
dition in which the Kanizsa figure was unreported and the
condition in which it was reported, we compared the
neural patterns for the experimental runs with those of
the control run. Although from the mean activity change
it seems that the pattern in the control run was similar
to that in the experimental runs for both the NIB and
the IB group (Figure 7; activity in all regions was higher
for the Kanizsa figures versus the control figures), we

Figure 6. A whole-brain analysis was performed for the NIB (A) and
IB groups (B), in which the Kanizsa figure was contrasted with the
three control figures (Kanizsa > Controls). Activity is in lower and
higher visual areas and does not differ between the two groups. Note
that the scans did not cover the whole brain but only recorded visual
cortex and extended into a part of the temporal and parietal cortex.
Dotted lines indicate upper and lower limits of epi acquisition.

Figure 7. Univariate results for the control run. Activity (in normalized
arbitrary units) associated with the four figures in each ROI for the
NIB group (A) and the IB group (B). Error bars denote SE.

962 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience Volume 26, Number 5



directly compared the two states by performing multi-
variate pattern analyses (MVPA).

MVPA

To compare the neural response of the Kanizsa figure
during reported and unreported conditions, we used
MVPA. With MVPA, we could predict which stimulus
was seen in one set of trials based on the neural patterns
obtained from an independent set of trials. This allowed
us to directly compare the neural response during the
experimental runs with those in the control run. First,
we tested whether MVPA worked on our data set by per-
forming the analysis within the three experimental runs.
We hypothesized that because only the Kanizsa figure
elicited a perceptually integrated percept, its multivoxel
pattern should be more consistent than the voxel pat-
terns underlying the three control figures and therefore
result in higher decoding performance. The logic behind
this reasoning stems from the conclusion drawn from
the univariate results: Visual areas processing the illusion
are more strongly activated, because there is more infor-
mation present in the Kanizsa illusion versus the control
conditions. When extending this conclusion to multi-
variate analyses, one would expect that the neural pat-
tern underlying the Kanizsa illusion is most consistent
because of the need to encode this information more
precisely. To test this hypothesis, we used ROI voxel pat-
terns for the four stimulus figures within each participant
to classify each of the figures during the experimental
runs. The two training runs were used to maximally dis-
tinguish the four neural patterns underlying each figure.
Then the labels that were given to the test run were clas-
sified as correct or not (1 or 0), and a percentage correct
for each figure presentation was obtained. We confirmed
that classification performance was highest for the Kanizsa
figure compared with the control figures, F(3, 66) = 10.6,
p < .001, and there was no interaction between perfor-
mance for the NIB and IB group, F(3, 66) = 1.3, p =
.282. This shows that processing a Kanizsa figure is re-
flected in a more consistent multivoxel representation,
regardless of whether participants were able to report
the figure. Next, we wanted to examine whether this
more consistent multivoxel representation for Kanizsa fig-
ures persists across runs in which the figure was reported
compared with the runs in which it was not reported. To
do so, we tested whether the patterns elicited during the
experimental condition could be used to classify the pat-
terns elicited in the control condition. We trained a neural
pattern classifier on the three experimental runs and clas-
sified the patterns from the control run. Again, we calcu-
lated the classification (percentage correct) for each figure
separately. If the patterns underlying the Kanizsa illusion
remained the same and reportability has no influence
on its neural representation, classification between the
experimental and control runs is predicted to be better
for the Kanizsa figures than for the control figures. If,

however, the underlying neural pattern changed because
of access to the figure, classification should not work
between the experimental and the control runs, resulting
in similar or even lower classification performance for the
Kanizsa figures than for the control figures.

Pattern classification was obtained for each ROI sepa-
rately. Classification performance for all ROIs averaged
and all ROIs separately is shown in Figure 8 (average
chance performance = 25%, see Methods). We were
able to determine which figure was presented during the
control run based on the patterns resulting from the ex-
perimental run, as all figures could be classified well above
chance. Again, classification worked best for the Kanizsa
figure, F(2.25, 49.50) = 11.6, p < .001, Greenhouse–
Geisser corrected; post hoc t tests compared with con-
trols, all p < .002, Bonferroni-corrected. This shows that
the multivoxel pattern underlying the Kanizsa figure is
more consistent even across the experimental and control
runs. There was no interaction between figure type and
group, suggesting that average classification performance
for the NIB and the IB group was the same (Figure 8A),
F(2.25, 49.50) = 2.2, p = .112, Greenhouse–Geisser cor-
rected. However, there was a trend toward significance.
Although for both the NIB and the IB group the Kanizsa
figure was classified best, F(3, 33) = 8.9, p < .001 and
F(3, 33) = 3.4, p = .029, respectively, the Kanizsa figure
might be better classified for the NIB than for the IB
group. To test whether the lack of an interaction effect
may have been because of a lack of power, we maximized
power by averaging classification performance for the
three control figures and tested against the Kanizsa fig-
ure. Now, we found an interaction between Figure and
Group F(1, 22) = 8.1, p= .01, showing that the difference
between the Kanizsa figure and its control figures was
larger for the NIB group than for the IB group. This sug-
gests that the neural pattern underlying the Kanizsa fig-
ure is more similar between the experimental run and
the control run for the NIB group than for the IB group.
As can be seen from Figure 8, the difference between the
Kanizsa figure and its control figures for the NIB group
was present in all ROIs, whereas for the IB group it was
most pronounced in area V3A and LOC. Therefore, it
seems that although overall activity in areas V1, V2, V3,
and V4 was higher for the Kanizsa figure in both the un-
reported and reported conditions (see Figures 4 and 7),
the consistency of activated voxels within these regions
varied between states. The implications of these results
are discussed below.

DISCUSSION

In this study, we examined the influence of access on the
perceptual processing of the Kanizsa illusion using an
inattentional blindness paradigm (Scholte et al., 2006; Rees
et al., 1999; Simons & Chabris, 1999) in combination with
fMRI. Although a large group of participants was not able

Vandenbroucke et al. 963



to select the Kanizsa figure after the experimental runs,
these participants still displayed a unique neural pattern
associated with processing a Kanizsa figure. The illusory fig-
ure elicited heightened activity in the areas that are critical
for the perception of the illusion (Seghier & Vuilleumier,
2006). Also, MVPA showed that the neural signature of
the Kanizsa during the unreported state could be used to
classify its neural signature during the reported state, and
classification performance was better for the Kanizsa figure
than for any of the nonillusory conditions. Together, these
results suggest that access is not necessary for the type of
perceptual inference that underlies the Kanizsa illusion to
take place in visual cortex.
The perceptual inference underlying the Kanizsa illu-

sion is a complex process that involves the grouping of
elements, surface segmentation, modulation of perceived
brightness and depth, and the creation of illusory contours.
Together, these processes lead to the perception of a fig-
ure lying on top of black disks. On the basis of the neural
correlates found in this study, we cannot exclusively con-
firm which of these processes took place in the absence
of access to the figure. In the paragraphs below, we will
reflect on which processes probably occurred based on
the presence of this specific neural pattern.

Mechanisms Underlying Kanizsa Processing

The neural correlates that accompanied Kanizsa figure pro-
cessing in this study were related to the illusory nature of
the percept and not to physical or cognitive stimulus attri-
butes. By using two additional control figures (Figure 1C
and D), we were able to dissociate perceptual inference
from cognitive inference; although the Line figure had the
same inducer layout and a pentagon could be cognitively
inferred, the perception of illusory contours and a contrast
difference between figure and background were absent.
The absence of this illusory percept was reflected in the
neural signature, such that the Line figure (Figure 1C)
showed the same modulation as the Line control figure
(Figure 1D), both in the accessible and unreported states.
Moreover, the spatial frequency difference for the Line
figure and its control was comparable with the spatial fre-
quency difference for the Kanizsa figure and its control.
Also, the elements of the Line figure could be grouped
to form a coherent whole more easily compared with the
Line control figure. The similarity between the neural sig-
nature for the Line figure and its control confirm that
there was no perceptual characteristic added to this figure

Figure 8. Multivariate results. Classification performance in percentage
correct averaged over all ROIs for the NIB group and the IB group (A)
and for each separate ROI (B and C). The classification for Kanizsa
figures is better than classification for the three control figures. Average
chance performance was 25%, corrected for each figure separately
(see Methods). Error bars denote SE.

964 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience Volume 26, Number 5



and that the neural modulation observed for the Kanizsa
figure was not because of differences in spatial frequency,
collinearity, or grouping mechanisms. Therefore, we sug-
gest that higher-level inference processes such as surface
segmentation, modulation of contrast and depth per-
ception, or the formation of illusory contours drove the
neural signature that was found for the Kanizsa figure.
The Kanizsa illusion is a prime example of perceptual

inference, a process that is linked to conscious processing
(Wokke et al., 2013; Harris et al., 2011; Fahrenfort, Scholte,
& Lamme, 2007). It has been shown that the Kanizsa illu-
sion is not perceived when its inducers are masked (Harris
et al., 2011), suggesting that conscious processing of the
inducers is necessary to perceive the figure. However,
other studies have shown that the Kanizsa illusion sur-
vives crowding (Lau & Cheung, 2012) and breaks through
interocular suppression more easily (Wang, Weng, &
He, 2012), suggesting that the Kanizsa illusion can be
processed unconsciously. Although these findings seem
to contradict each other, the perception of the Kanizsa
illusion may depend on multiple mechanisms.
To process a Kanizsa figure, its inducers should be

grouped and processed as one object. This process might
be driven by grouping mechanisms that depend on
fast, feedforward activity and could be performed un-
consciously (Roelfsema, 2006). Then, the details of the
figure—the specific illusory shape that is seen—are filled
in by feedback mechanisms. In a recent TMS experiment,
it was shown that the critical time window for V1/V2 in
which discrimination of Kanizsa figures was affected
occurred after the critical time window in which the LOC
(Wokke et al., 2013)—an area that sits higher up the visual
hierarchy and is involved in object detection (Malach,
Levy, & Hasson, 2002)—was involved. Moreover, this effect
occurred only when the support ratio of the Kanizsa in-
ducers was large enough to clearly cause an illusory per-
cept. Critically, for all the support ratios that were used,
also for those not evoking an illusory percept, the inducers
could be grouped. This suggests that V1 is causally in-
volved in the shape formation of the illusion and not in
the initial grouping of elements. These findings match
with the behavioral findings of Wang et al. (2012) on the
one hand and Harris et al. (2011) on the other hand. The
Kanizsa figure may break through interocular suppres-
sion easier than a control figure: If the grouping of ele-
ments occurs unconsciously, a Kanizsa figure will be
seen more easily than a control figure that cannot be
grouped. In the study in which the Kanizsa inducers
were masked, however, the critical manipulation was for
participants to perceive which direction the illusory trian-
gle was facing, and thus, the shape of the figure should
be processed. If shape processing depends on feedback
interactions, masking should indeed inhibit the forma-
tion of the shape (Harris et al., 2011; Fahrenfort et al.,
2007). Together, these results suggest that perceiving
the Kanizsa illusion depends on unconscious grouping
mechanisms and conscious figure formation, which are

supported by feedforward and feedback mechanisms,
respectively.

Although in the current study we were not able to di-
rectly test the involvement of feedforward and feedback
mechanisms because of the temporal resolution of the
fMRI signal, we found heightened activity in V1 and V2,
although the receptive field sizes in V1 and V2 are an
order of 6–12 times too small to encapsulate the entire
Kanizsa figure (Smith, Singh, Williams, & Greenlee, 2001).
This suggests that, in our study, feedback from higher
areas modulated activity in lower visual areas, thereby
suggesting that processes underlying shape formation that
accompanies the perception of the pentagon itself had
occurred (Wokke et al., 2013; Harris et al., 2011).

Contrary to the fact that we found heightened activity
in V1/V2 for the Kanizsa figure both in the unreported
and reported conditions, we did not find evidence for
a more consistent voxel pattern within V1/V2 between
unreported and reported conditions. Possibly, the modula-
tion in lower visual areas should not be attributed to feed-
back from higher areas, but to a more general attention
mechanisms: It could be that the Kanizsa figure drew
more attention away from the central letter task, and there-
fore, participants had to put more resources into staying
focused on the central task compared with when the
control figures were presented. However, if a larger atten-
tional demand could explain the neural modulation in
lower visual areas, then this would still show that the par-
ticipants who were IB also processed this figure to a cer-
tain extent. As our control figures rule out any lower
level or cognitive inference mechanisms such as spatial
frequency, collinearity, or grouping mechanisms, the IB
group must have processed the Kanizsa figure at least up
to a level where surface segmentation, a modulation of
contrast/depth, or illusory contour formation took place.

There are more explanations for the higher mean activ-
ity, but not necessarily higher consistency for the Kanizsa
figure between unreported and reported conditions. It
might be that surface segmentation and perhaps a modula-
tion of contrast/depth occurred through mechanisms of
feedback, however, the illusory contour formation itself
was less clear. Participants might have experienced a
“blurrier” representation. Indeed, attention has been
shown to optimize signal-to-noise levels by both signal
enhancement and noise reduction (for an overview, see
Carrasco, 2011). Reducing the noise and thus the variability
in the signal might lead to a voxel pattern that is more
consistent over time. Therefore, the neural pattern for the
NIB group might have been more consistent between the
experimental and control runs, whereas for the IB group,
although higher-level inference processes took place, the
neural patterns were less well defined. Also, the fact that
the NIB group already reported about the figure after
the experimental runs made their task during the experi-
mental runs much more similar than for the IB group;
they did not have to search for a specific figure. Perhaps
the way in which the task was performed influenced the

Vandenbroucke et al. 965



neural patterns underlying the processing of the figures
as well.

Inattentional Blindness and the Kanizsa Figure

To create inattentional blindness, we specifically manipu-
lated cognitive load and not perceptual load (Yi et al.,
2004). We chose to manipulate cognitive load to test
the hypothesis that cognitive access is necessary for per-
ceptual inference. IB participants could not identify the
presented figure when they were uninformed about the
configuration of the distracting stimuli during the experi-
mental runs, although when they were informed about
the configuration during the control run, they were able
to select the correct figure although they maintained
similar performance on the n-back task. This warrants
the conclusion that the figure was potentially accessible,
yet not accessed during its presentation. It may well be
that if we had manipulated perceptual instead of cog-
nitive load, results would have been different. Outcomes
of neuronal modeling support the prediction that during
inattentional blindness incoming sensory information
might be processed but blocked from access because
the network is engaged in processing distracting infor-
mation (Dehaene & Changeux, 2005). In that sense, the
paradigm of inattentional blindness formalizes the com-
mon intuition that many stimuli in plain sight remain un-
noticed and are therefore never accessed, although they
are potentially accessible, and forms the most rigorous
test of the fate of unaccessed visual stimuli.

A problem of inattentional blindness paradigms, in
which cognitive load and not perceptual load is manipu-
lated, is that it is inherently a between-subject design: If
a participant knows that a certain figure is present during
the task, they will be much more prone to notice it on a
next run. To obtain a sufficient amount of data, we there-
fore chose to present participants with three runs before
asking them about the presence of the Kanizsa figure.
Moreover, during runs, participants were presented with
three control figures as well. A potential alternative expla-
nation for the participantsʼ behavior is that the inability to
select the correct figure was not a result of inattentional
blindness, but of inattentional amnesia (Wolfe, 1999). It
could be the case that participants were able to access
the figure at the moment of presentation, but a memory
failure—perhaps because of overwriting of the sub-
sequently presented control figures—prevented them
from selecting the correct figure when asked about it.
However, in comparison with studies where the target
figure was presented just once (Thakral, 2011; Simons
& Chabris, 1999), in our study, the figure was presented
18 times, each for a period of 14.4 sec. The question
about these figures was then asked within 1 min after
the last stimulus presentation. This makes it improbable
that the failure to select the correct figure was because
of simple memory failure. Moreover, the same participants
were perfectly able to select the figure when in the con-

trol run their task instruction was to pay attention to the
figures; thus, it is not the case that these participants
simply had bad visual memory.
Another possibility might be that the IB participants

had more imprecise memory than the NIB participants
and therefore chose the wrong figure. Indeed, this could
have been the case for the seven participants in the IB
group that chose a Kanizsa-type foil. However, the five
participants that did not chose a Kanizsa-type foil dis-
played the same neural pattern, suggesting that the re-
sults for the IB group were not driven by participants
who had possibly caught a glimpse of the Kanizsa figure.
Although we cannot be certain that participants in the

IB group had absolutely no access to the figure during
the presentation itself, the main point is that in both
frameworks—inattentional blindness or amnesia—the
participant was not able to report or recognize a recently
presented figure even when forced to make a decision.
One of the functions of cognitive access is storage in
working memory, and one could say that access has
failed when participants cannot report about objects that
were presented multiple times only a few seconds ago.
At the same time, the neural signature coding for the
processing of the figure was clearly present. This confirms
the importance of using brain measurements when in-
vestigating the nature of visual representations instead of
relying on behavioral measures of report only (Kanai &
Tsuchiya, 2012; Lamme, 2010).
In this study, the neural correlates that we found for

the NIB and IB groups were similarly present in lower
and higher visual areas. This suggests that the areas
involved in processing the figure itself did not differ
between conditions. Possibly, whether the percept could
be reported or not depended on neural patterns in frontal
or frontoparietal areas (not included in the current EPI
sequence; Carmel, Lavie, & Rees, 2006; Lumer & Rees,
1999; although see Thakral, 2011). However, the neural
patterns that were unique to the Kanizsa illusion were
present in both lower- and higher-level visual areas for
the IB group. Therefore, even if the difference in report-
ability depended on activity in more frontal areas, this did
not change the neural patterns associated with Kanizsa
processing such as surface segmentation, the modulation
of contrast difference, and perhaps illusory contour for-
mation such as isolated in this study and other studies
investigating Kanizsa processing (Seghier & Vuilleumier,
2006). This suggests that access to a stimulus does not
alter the neural mechanisms that are involved in process-
ing the perceptual characteristics of that stimulus. Instead,
it might make the representation globally available for
cognitive manipulation and report. Possibly, participants
in the NIB group had some leftover attention that they
allocated to the distracter stimuli, thereby gaining access
to the Kanizsa figure: As discussed above, attention might
have improved the neural signature, making the neural
pattern better defined. This might explain why the classi-
fication scores for the Kanizsa figure in the NIB group

966 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience Volume 26, Number 5



trended to be higher than those in the IB group: Access
might make the neural patterns more pronounced and
consistent over time. At the same time, this does not
weaken or disqualify our main finding that processes of
perceptual inference associated with the Kanizsa illusion
are present without access (or attention).

Converging Evidence with Patient Studies

The results found in this study are in line with previous
literature on the perception of Kanizsa figures for patients
with hemispatial neglect or parietal extinction (Conci et al.,
2009; Vuilleumier, Valenza, & Landis, 2001; Mattingley,
Davis, & Driver, 1997). These patients have a deficit in
perceiving stimuli in their left visual field when they are
simultaneously presented with stimuli in their right visual
field. Presumably, this deficit stems from their unilateral
parietal brain damage that causes an inability to attend to
the left visual field when a stimulus is presented in the
right visual field. When presented with a bilateral Kanizsa
figure, patients are unable to judge the presence or sim-
ilarity of Kanizsa inducers on the left side of their visual
field, but they are nevertheless able to make judgments
about the surface of the Kanizsa figure. This shows that,
although half of the inducers are not well perceived be-
cause of a deficit in paying attention to these stimuli,
surface segmentation remains intact. In the current study,
we showed that, indeed, the neural signature in lower
visual areas underlying processes such as surface seg-
mentation remain intact despite a lack of attention. This
confirms that attention and thus the ability to report about
(the details of) a figure do not alter the way in which this
figure is processed on a visual level.

Implications for Consciousness Research

One of the main questions in consciousness research
nowadays is whether attention—and therefore access—
to a percept is crucial for consciousness to occur (Block,
2007, 2011; Cohen & Dennett, 2011; Lau & Rosenthal,
2011; Kouider, De Gardelle, Sackur, & Dupoux, 2010;
Lamme, 2006, 2010; Koch & Tsuchiya, 2007; Fahrenfort
& Lamme, 2012). In the current study, we showed that
(at least some of the) neural processes underlying percep-
tual inference occur even when participants are not able to
report about their percept. As perceiving the Kanizsa illu-
sion is highly likely to depend on feedback from higher to
lower visual areas (Wokke et al., 2013; Harris et al., 2011;
Knebel & Murray, 2012) and we foundmodulation of lower
visual areas, this suggests that higher-level integration can
take place in the absence of access to the percept. If one
takes this type of perceptual inference as an indicator of
conscious processing, one could conclude that conscious-
ness can occur in the absence of attention. The fact that
such processes can occur in the absence of direct access
appeals to the rich visual world we experience when we

look around: We do not have to pay attention to every
object to be able to experience the world as a whole. How-
ever, more work is needed to disentangle which pro-
cesses can and cannot occur in the absence of attention
and whether these processes qualify as being termed
conscious or not.

Conclusions

This study extends previous work showing that several
perceptual processes such as figure ground segregation
(Scholte et al., 2006), feature grouping (Pitts, Martínez, &
Hillyard, 2012; Moore & Egeth, 1997), and visual context
effects (Lathrop, Bridgeman, & Tseng, 2011) occur during
inattentional blindness. In this study, we show that the
neural Kanizsa signature does not subside when par-
ticipants are not able to report about their percept. Im-
portantly, the Kanizsa figure is accompanied by a unique
signature that is absent when controlling for confounding
factors such as collinearity, spatial frequency, grouping,
and cognitive inference. Including these controls strongly
suggests that the signature is a correlate of the illusory
percept itself and not of something else. This implies that
one or more processes underlying this type of perceptual
inference occurs in the absence of access to the percept,
potentially putting nonaccessed states in the realm of
conscious rather than unconscious processing (Lamme,
2010).

Acknowledgments

This work was made possible by an advanced ERC grant to
V. A. F. L. We thank Ned Block for his helpful comments on
this manuscript.

Reprint requests should be sent to Annelinde R. E. Vandenbroucke,
Department of Psychology, University of Amsterdam, Weesperplein
4, 1018 XA, Amsterdam, the Netherlands, or via e-mail: a.r.e.
vandenbroucke@uva.nl.

REFERENCES

Becker, M. F., & Knopp, J. (1978). Processing of visual illusions
in the frequency and spatial domains. Perception &
Psychophysics, 23, 521–526.

Block, N. (2007). Consciousness, accessibility, and the mesh
between psychology and neuroscience. Behavioral Brain
Sciences, 30, 481–499; discussion 499-548.

Block, N. (2011). Perceptual consciousness overflows cognitive
access. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 15, 567–575.

Carmel, D., Lavie, N., & Rees, G. (2006). Conscious awareness
of flicker in humans involves frontal and parietal cortex.
Current Biology, 16, 907–911.

Carrasco, M. (2011). Visual attention: The past 25 years.
Vision Research, 51, 1484–1525.

Cohen, M. A., & Dennett, D. C. (2011). Consciousness
cannot be separated from function. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 15, 358–364.

Conci, M., Böbel, E., Matthias, E., Keller, I., Müller, H. J.,
& Finke, K. (2009). Preattentive surface and contour

Vandenbroucke et al. 967



grouping in Kanizsa figures: Evidence from parietal
extinction. Neuropsychologia, 47, 726–732.

Davis, G., & Driver, J. (1998). Kanizsa subjective figures can
act as occluding surfaces at parallel stages of visual search.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception
and Performance, 24, 169–184.

Dehaene, S., & Changeux, J.-P. (2005). Ongoing
spontaneous activity controls access to consciousness:
A neuronal model for inattentional blindness. PLoS
Biology, 3, e141.

Fahrenfort, J. J., & Lamme, V. A. F. (2012). A true science
of consciousness explains phenomenology: Comment
on Cohen and Dennett. Trends in Cognitive Sciences,
16, 138–139.

Fahrenfort, J. J., Scholte, H. S., & Lamme, V. A. F. (2007).
Masking disrupts reentrant processing in human
visual cortex. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience,
19, 1488–1497.

Ginsburg, A. P. (1975). Is the illusory triangle physical or
imaginary? Nature, 257, 219–220.

Goebel, R., Esposito, F., & Formisano, E. (2006). Analysis
of functional image analysis contest (FIAC) data with
brainvoyager QX: From single-subject to cortically aligned
group general linear model analysis and self-organizing
group independent component analysis. Human Brain
Mapping, 27, 392–401.

Halgren, E., Mendola, J., Chong, C. D. R., & Dale, A. M.
(2003). Cortical activation to illusory shapes as measured
with magnetoencephalography. Neuroimage, 18,
1001–1009.

Harris, J. J., Schwarzkopf, D. S., Song, C., Bahrami, B., &
Rees, G. (2011). Contextual illusions reveal the limit of
unconscious visual processing. Psychological Science,
22, 399.

Kanai, R., & Tsuchiya, N. (2012). Qualia. Current Biology,
22, R392–R396.

Kanizsa, G. (1974). Contours without gradients or cognitive
contours. Italian Journal of Psychology, 1, 93–113.

Kanizsa, G. (1976). Subjective contours. Scientific American,
234, 48–52.

Knebel, J.-F., & Murray, M. M. (2012). Towards a resolution
of conflicting models of illusory contour processing in
humans. Neuroimage, 59, 2808–2817.

Koch, C., & Tsuchiya, N. (2007). Attention and consciousness:
Two distinct brain processes. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 11, 16–22.

Kouider, S., De Gardelle, V., Sackur, J., & Dupoux, E.
(2010). How rich is consciousness? The partial
awareness hypothesis. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 14,
301–307.

Lamme, V. A. F. (2006). Towards a true neural stance
on consciousness. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 10,
494–501.

Lamme, V. A. F. (2010). How neuroscience will change our
view on consciousness. Cognitive Neuroscience, iFirst,
1–21.

Lathrop, W. B., Bridgeman, B., & Tseng, P. (2011). Perception
in the absence of attention: Perceptual processing in the
Roelofs effect during inattentional blindness. Perception,
40, 1104–1119.

Lau, H., & Rosenthal, D. (2011). Empirical support for
higher-order theories of conscious awareness. Trends
in Cognitive Sciences, 15, 365–373.

Lau, J. S. F., & Cheung, S. (2012). Illusory contour formation
survives crowding. Journal of Vision, 12, 15.

Lavie, N. (2005). Distracted and confused?: Selective
attention under load. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 9,
75–82.

Lee, T. S., & Nguyen, M. (2001). Dynamics of subjective
contour formation in the early visual cortex. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences, 98, 1907.

Lumer, E. D., & Rees, G. (1999). Covariation of activity in
visual and prefrontal cortex associated with subjective
visual perception. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences, 96, 1669–1673.

Maertens, M., Pollmann, S., Hanke, M., Mildner, T., & Möller, H.
(2008). Retinotopic activation in response to subjective
contours in primary visual cortex. Frontiers in Human
Neuroscience, 2.

Malach, R., Levy, I., & Hasson, U. (2002). The topography
of high-order human object areas. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 6, 176–184.

Mattingley, J. B., Davis, G., & Driver, J. (1997). Preattentive
filling-in of visual surfaces in parietal extinction. Science,
275, 671–674.

Mendola, J. D., Dale, A. M., Fischl, B., Liu, A. K., & Tootell,
R. B. H. (1999). The representation of illusory and real
contours in human cortical visual areas revealed by
functional magnetic resonance imaging. The Journal
of Neuroscience, 19, 8560–8572.

Moore, C. M., & Egeth, H. (1997). Perception without
attention: Evidence of grouping under conditions of
inattention. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance, 23, 339–352.

Nakayama, K., & Shimojo, S. (1992). Experiencing and
perceiving visual surfaces. Science, 257, 1357–1363.

Pitts, M. A., Martínez, A., & Hillyard, S. A. (2012). Visual
processing of contour patterns under conditions
of inattentional blindness. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 24, 287–303.

Pylyshyn, Z. (1999). Is vision continuous with cognition?
The case for cognitive impenetrability of visual perception.
Behavioral Brain Sciences, 2, 341–365. Open peer
commentary 366-423.

Rees, G., Russell, C., Frith, C. D., & Driver, J. (1999).
Inattentional blindness versus inattentional amnesia for
fixated but ignored words. Science, 286, 2504–2507.

Rensink, R. A., OʼRegan, J. K., & Clark, J. J. (1997). To see or
not to see: The need for attention to perceive changes in
scenes. Psychological Science, 8, 368–373.

Roelfsema, P. R. (2006). Cortical algorithms for perceptual
grouping. Annual Reviews Neuroscience, 29, 203–227.

Scholte, H. S., Jolij, J., Fahrenfort, J. J., & Lamme, V. A. F.
(2008). Feedforward and recurrent processing in scene
segmentation: Electroencephalography and functional
magnetic resonance imaging. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 20, 2097–2109.

Scholte, H. S., Witteveen, S. C., Spekreijse, H., & Lamme,
V. A. F. (2006). The influence of inattention on the neural
correlates of scene segmentation. Brain Research, 1076,
106–115.

Seghier, M., Dojat, M., Delon-Martin, C., Rubin, C., Warnking, J.,
Segebarth, C., et al. (2000). Moving illusory contours
activate primary visual cortex: An fMRI study. Cerebral
Cortex, 10, 663–670.

Seghier, M., & Vuilleumier, P. (2006). Functional
neuroimaging findings on the human perception of
illusory contours. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral
Reviews, 30, 595–612.

Simons, D. J., & Chabris, C. F. (1999). Gorillas in our midst:
Sustained inattentional blindness for dynamic events.
Perception, 28, 1059–1074.

Smith, A. T., Singh, K. H., Williams, A. L., & Greenlee, M. W.
(2001). Estimating receptive field size from fMRI data
in human striate and extrastriate visual cortex. Cerebral
Cortex, 11, 1182–1190.

968 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience Volume 26, Number 5



Talairach, J., & Tournoux, P. (1988). Co-planar stereotaxic
atlas of the human brain: 3-Dimensional proportional
system: An approach to cerebral imaging. New York: Thieme.

Thakral, P. P. (2011). The neural substrates associated with
inattentional blindness. Consciousness and Cognition,
20, 1768–1775.

Vuilleumier, P., Valenza, N., & Landis, T. (2001). Explicit and
implicit perception of illusory contours in unilateral
spatial neglect: Behavioral and anatomical correlates of
preattentive grouping mechanisms. Neuropsychologia, 39,
597–610.

Wandell, B. A., & Winawer, J. (2011). Imaging retinotopic maps
in the human brain. Vision Research, 51, 718–737.

Wang, L., Weng, X., & He, S. (2012). Perceptual grouping
without awareness: Superiority of Kanizsa triangle in breaking
interocular suppression. PLoS One, 7, e40106.

Wokke, M. E., Vandenbroucke, A. R. E., Scholte, H. S., &
Lamme, V. A. F. (2013). Confuse your illusion: Feedback to
early visual cortex contributes to perceptual completion.
Psychological Science, 24, 63–71.

Wolfe, J. M. (1999). Inattentional amnesia. In V. Coltheart (Ed.),
Fleeting memories (pp. 71–94). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Yi, D.-J., Woodman, G., Widders, D., Marois, R., & Chun, M. M.
(2004). The neural fate of ignored stimuli: Dissociable effects
of perceptual and working-memory load. Nature
Neuroscience, 7, 992–996.

Vandenbroucke et al. 969


